The Scam
From Harshad Mehta to Ketan Parekh

Debashis Basu
Sucheta Dalal

KenSource Information Services P. Ltd.
315, 3

rd

Floor, Hind Service Industries Premises,

Off Veer Savarkar Marg, Shivaji Park,
Dadar West. Mumbai 400028
www.kensource.com
mail@kensource.com

Copyright © Debashis Basu & Sucheta Dalal
First Published 1993
First Reprint 1994
Revised & Updated 2001
Third Revised Edition & Fourth Printing 2005
Third Edition, Fifth Printing 2006
Third Edition, Sixth Printing 2007
Third Edition, Seventh Printing 2009
Third Edition, Eighth Printing (updated introduction) 2014

ISBN 81-88154-09-1

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronically or
mechanically, including photocopy, recording or any information
storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from
the publisher or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright
Act 1956 (as amended). Any person who does any unauthorised act
in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution
and civil claims for damages.
Typeset in 11 pt. CenturyOldst BT and printed at
Gopsons Paper Limited. A-2&3 , Sector 64, NOIDA

KenSource aims to publish lively non-fiction books on business, finance, management, markets,
economics, socio-economic issues and contiguous areas. Enquiries welcome from writers with
new and interesting ideas.

To Our Parents

Acknowledgements
WE had initially followed the scam while working for The Times of India
and Business Today. The book partly derives its material from scores of
interviews with most of the players who were directly or indirectly part of
the scam, mainly top brokers and top bank officials. Overcoming their initial
circumspection about talking to the press while the scam investigation was
on, they eventually gave us a lot of their time to discuss, clarify and share
important documents that helped our writing. Our deepest gratitude is to
these numerous knowledgeable anonymous sources. Many others helped a
lot by way of crucial information, introductions, and their moral support, but
unfortunately, they too cannot be named.

Finally, this is the place to record our inestimable debt to our prime source, a
wonderful human being and now a dear friend and guide. He cannot
unfortunately be identified (our notes and conversations unimaginatively
refer to him as Deep Throat) because he is a part of the securities business
himself. Our understanding of the complex transactions, the nature of the
players, the specific deals and confidential conversations between top
officials were all derived from the long hours he has so generously spent
with us in nondescript restaurants in the suburbs, dropping us home in the
dead of night and then driving back into town. Without Deep Throat’s help,
this book, and much of the reporting we have done earlier, would have been
inconceivable.

This book was a bestseller in 1992-93 when it was first published. For seven
years the book had been out-of-print. We had innumerable requests for
copies, so we decided to update the book after what was known as the Ketan
Parekh scam in 2000. The book was then printed in 2001 under the
KenSource imprint after extensive revisions and additions (the Scam of
2001). That edition was soon sold out. Encouraged by the continued demand
we published a third expanded edition of the book, which has gone into

multiple reprints. In this effort, as in the earlier edition, we received
invaluable guidance, help and encouragement from the late Mr TN
Shanbhag of The Strand Book Stall in Mumbai. Mr Shanbagh was an
institution by himself and spent his life pursuing his mission to encourage
people to read. His absence continues to be felt by book lovers in Mumbai.
The book has also benefited immensely from the editing expertise of Dr.
Nita Mukherjee.

Table Of Contents
Chronology
Authors’ Note

1. The Scam Surfaces
2. Banker, Broker, Sucker, Thief
3. Creed of Greed
4. A Greenhorn
5. The Big Bull
6. A Bloody War
7. Harshad in the Net
8. Wielding the Crowbar
9. Stanchart and the Gang of Five
10. Stanchart’s Money Trail
11. Superbanker
12. The Fairgrowth Story
13. A Can of Worms
14. The Buccaneer Bankers
15. The One-eyed God
16. The Witch-hunt

17. Who Won, Who Lost, Who Got Away
18. Harshad’s Return
19. Justice Delayed
20. Play It Again Sam
21. Nothing Official About It
22. Epilogue

Chronology

April 23, 1992: The Times of India reports that the State Bank of India has asked the Big Bull to
square up Rs 500 crores of irregularities.
April 29-30: There is mayhem in Parliament. The finance minister, Manmohan Singh announces that
the Reserve Bank of India will probe the scam. The government calls in the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI).
April 30: The Indian Express reports that the UCO Bank allowed Harshad Mehta’s companies to use
Rs 50.37 crores by discounting its bills.
May 5: The Reserve Bank of India forms a committee headed by deputy governor, R Janakiraman, to
probe the scam.
May 6: The Indian Express reports that the National Housing Bank, a wholly-owned subsidiary of
the Reserve Bank of India has given money to Harshad Mehta to help him square up his outstanding
with the State Bank of India.
May 9: M J Pherwani, the non-executive chairman of the National Housing Bank, quits. Two days
later he leaves the chairmanship of the Maharashtra State Finance Corporation, the Stock Holding
Corporation and the Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services.
May 10 : The Standard Chartered Bank learns about the securities gap in its books. The UCO Bank
chairman, K Margabanthu, is asked to go on leave.
May 11 : The CBI led by K Madhavan, starts investigations.
May 14 : The CBI freezes Harshad Mehta’s bank account and seizes his assets.
May 21 : M J Pherwani dies.
May 25 : The RBI asks Bhupen Dalal to step down from the Bank of Karad.
May 27 : The High Court orders the liquidation of the Bank of Karad. The order sparks a run on the
bank.

May 29 : S P Sabapathy, chairman of the Bank of Madura, is dismissed by the Reserve Bank of India.
There is a run on the State Bank of Saurashtra after rumours that it is stuck with false bank receipts.
May 30: First report of Janakariman published. The CBI registers a case against the State Bank of
India officials after the first Janakiraman Committee report.
May 31-June 1 : Niranjan Shah, an associate of Harshad Mehta, is raided by the Income Tax
department. He slips out of the country.
June 4 : Harshad Mehta, his brother Ashwin, the State Bank of India deputy managing director and
others arrested.
June 6: Special Court Ordinance promulgated.
June 20 : The CBI files cases against Bhupen Dalal, J P Gandhi, Hiten Dalal, Abhay Narottam, T B
Ruia and officials of Canbank Mutual and Canbank Financial Services.
June 23 : Bhupen Dalal, A D Narottam, Hiten Dalal and others are arrested.
June 29 : Ashok Kumar of Canbank Financial Services is arrested.
June 30: The RBI bans Fairgrowth from any transactions.
July 2 : Notification of Bhupen Dalal, T.B.Ruia and J.P.Gandhi
July 3-8 : John Docherty takes over from P S Nat as chief executive officer of the StanChart Bank.
The bank sacks five employees - Arvind Lal, Jaideep Pathak, R K Iyer, V R Srinivasan and V
Srinivas. The second report of the Janakiraman Committee comes out. Bhupen Dalal and others are
further remanded to custody. The UCO Bank chairman, K Margabanthu, is sacked. The CBI registers
two more cases against Harshad Mehta relating to SBI Capital Markets and State Bank of Saurashtra.
July 9 : P Chidambaram quits because his wife owned 25,000 shares in Fairgrowth. The CBI registers
a case against the UCO Bank chairman, K Margabanthu. The government announces a probe by the
Joint Parliamentary Committee.
July 13 : The CBI files a First Information Report against Harshad Mehta and officials of the National
Housing Bank and the SBI.
July 20: K Madhavan of the CBI seeks voluntary retirement. There are rumours that he was being
pressured to suppress the probe.

July 21: V Krishnarnurthy resigns from the Planning Commission.
July 22: Bhupen Dalal and five others are granted bail.
July 30: The CBI registers a case against Fairgrowth. and raids its offices.
August 6: The Joint Parliament Committee, consisting of thirty members, is set up.
August 7-10: The CBI files Corruption charges against V Krishnamurthy and arrests him. His
accounts and the Sanwa Bank account of K J Investments Ltd., run by his sons, is frozen.
August 26: The third Janakiraman Report indicts the Bank of America, Citibank and C Mackertich,
and Stewart & Co.
August 28 : The office and residence of Ajay Kayan, a key broker for Citibank, are raided.
September 4: The Joint Parliamentary Committee files a breach of privilege case against Minister Of
State For Finance Rameshwar Thakur for attempting to influence certain Committee members.
September 7: The CBI arrests K Dharmapal, managing director of Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd.
September 15: The Joint Parliamentary Committee hearings start.
September 21 : R Lakshminarayan, executive director of Fairgrowth, is arrested.
September 22: Harshad Mehta is released.
October 8: The Standard Chartered Bank sues Citibank in New York for Rs 115.69 crores.
October 14: The JPC hearing implicates the union minister for petroleum and natural gas, B
Shankaranand, for having ordered the placement of funds to Canbank Financial Services, where his
son was a director.
November 10 : Attorney General G Ramaswamy quits over allegations that he had taken a Rs 15 lakh
overdraft from the scam-tainted Stanchart Bank.
November 24: The CBI raids the office and residences of M C Nawalakha, member (finance) of the
Oil and Natural Gas Commission.

November 25: The CBI registers a First Information Report against Nawalakha for diverting Oil and
Natural Gas Commission funds to Harshad Mehta. The industrialist, T B Ruia, is arrested six months
after the Stanchart Bank named him as one of the accused. (He was let off by the court several years
later).
November 27 : The Stanchart bank files recovery claims against sixteen banks and mutual funds
amounting to approximately Rs 650 crores.
November 30: The RBI rejects the Bank of America’s application for Vikram Talwar to continue as
its India chief. Talwar quits India.
December 2 : The RBI asks Citibank to remove A S Thiyagarajan, area manager of the bank’s
operations in three South Asian countries and the mastermind behind the bank’s Indian operations.

1993

June 16: Mehta claims to have paid a Rs 1 crore bribe to prime minister P.V. Narasimha Rao.
October 26: First charge sheet filed by the CBI (against Canfina)
December 21: JPC report presented in Lok Sabha.
Scam 2001

Feb 28: Yashwant Sinha unveils a `dream budget’. Sensex opens firm at 4070.37 and closes at
4247.04, gaining 177 points.
Mar 1: After an intra-day movement of over 160 points, Sensex settles with a gain of 25 points. New
Economy stocks under selling pressure. Rumours of Ketan Parekh’s payment problem circulates.
Mar 2: Black Friday. Sensex sheds its entire post-budget gains and finally settles at 4095 with a loss
of almost 176 points, under massive bear hammering. Main casualty : K-10 stocks. Rumours about
payment problems accelerates. SEBI announces that it will probe into the crash.
Mar 5: SEBI raises margins. Sensex loses another 97 points. Selling continues in IT stocks. SEBI
rules out any payment crisis and contends that BSE holds Rs 2,400 crore in the form of capital and

margins – 47% of the total outstanding amount.
Mar 8: SEBI bans short sales. Rumours of a payment crisis on the Calcutta Stock Exchange (CSE).
BSE president Anand Rathi resigns in the afternoon following allegation of misusing sensitive
information. Deena Mehta becomes interim president.
Mar 9: Sensex which opens with a downward gap of 70 points and loses 175 points during the day.
Three prominent brokers operating for Ketan Parekh - Dinesh Singhania, Ashok Poddar and Harish
Biyani default in CSE.
Mar 12: Sensex loses another 114 points on the back of a falling Nasdaq, and sale of shares held as
collateral by banks. SEBI sacks BSE broker-directors Deena A. Mehta, Anand Rathi, Himanshu N.
Kaji, Jayesh Sheth, Kirit B. Shah, Motilal Oswal and Niranjan K. Nanavati.
Mar 13: Sensex swings by over 340 points and sinks by 227 points to touch a new 22-month low of
3540.65 after Nasdaq had fallen below 2000 and Dow melted by 400-points overnight. Sinha
announces that 200 more scrips will be put on rolling settlement including those in the ‘A’ group.
Tehelka.com’s videotape on defence bribery scandal hits during market hours and even as the
Parliamnent is debating the stockmarket crash.
Mar 14: Thanks to massive support operations launched by UTI and other institutions, Sensex
bounces back by a staggering 184 points.
March 15: SEBI bars proprietary trading by stock exchange presidents, vice-presidents and
treasurers. It also mandates that fund managers and investment advisors to disclose their exact
positions and that of their family members before they pass any comment on a particular scrip in the
media.
Mar 30: Ketan Parekh’s involvement in the Madhavpura Mercantile Co-operative Bank’s pay order
scam comes to light when Bank of India files a criminal complaint against Parekh with the CBI. CBI
arrests Parekh in the evening. SEBI asks CSE’s governing board to resign.
March 30: CSE president Kamal Parekh, vice-president K. K. Daga and six other directors resigned
followed the payments crisis on the bourse for the last three settlements.
Apr 4: CBI questions and arrests Kirit Parekh, a relative of Ketan Parekh. The merger of UTI Bank
and Global Trust Bank is called off. SEBI bars Ketan Parekh’s broking and merchant banking firms
from doing fresh business.
Apr 9-11: CBI arrests Ramesh Parekh, managing director of Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative
Bank. Ketan Parekh admits to CBI that he was funded by Zee and HFCL. Zee denies lending money
to any broker but says it advanced funds for acquisition of 28.5% in AB Corp and 15% in B4U.

Ramesh Gelli of Global Trust Bank steps down as the CMD even as GTB denies link with Ketan
Parekh.
Apr 12: R S Hugar, former chairman of Corporation Bank, appointed as the new chairman and
managing director of Global Trust Bank. Sensex tumbles by 142 points to touch a 27-month low of
3184.
Apr 16: SEBI investigation into the market crash blames bull liquidation and short sales by bear
operators. Sensex touches a 28-month low of 3096.51 and bounces back.
Apr 19: SEBI bars Credit Suisse First Boston, Nirmal Bang Broking and First Global Stock Broking
from doing fresh business till further notice. It permanently debars Harshad Mehta from dealing in
securities. It finally acts on the 1998 case of price rigging, barring BPL, Videocon and Sterlite from
accessing the capital markets.
Apr 20: First Global’s Shankar Sharma arrested for allegedly threatening an IT official but later
granted bail.
Apr 24: CSE files cases against 10 brokers for dishonouring cheques issued by them to the exchange.
Apr 26: A SEBI committee proposes to abolish carry forward for shares trading under rolling
settlement, which is to encompass all A group scrips by 2 July 2001. Government forms a Joint
Parliamentary Committee to probe the stock market scam.
May 2: Bombay High Court dismisses Anand Rathi's petition challenging the suspension of his four
firms by SEBI. The risk management group of SEBI decides to lift the ban on short sales from 2 July
2001, and announces that on the same day 200 more scrips will be shifted to the rolling settlement
mode.
May 9: Broker Bimal Gandhi commits suicide after he suffers a huge loss as a result of the stock
market crash.
May 10: RBI sacks the chief of Kozhikode-based Nedungadi Bank, A R Moorthy, for allowing bank
funds to be misused by three brokers including Rajendra Banthia scam-accused in 1992 and 1998.
May 14: SEBI finally approves the JR Varma Committee proposal to ban badla from July 2, introduce
options on individual stocks and shift all stocks into rolling settlement from 2 January, 2002.
May 16: In its third session some JPC members oppose chairman’s idea to exclude UTI and other
mutual funds from the ambit of the probe. He announces that session and a final decision on
submission of the report would be taken by the end of July. The next day he retracts asserting that the
committee can call UTI or any other mutual fund for the probe.

May 18: Mumbai court grants bail to disgraced stock broker Ketan Parekh, embroiled in Madhavpura
Mercantile Co-operative Bank scam which culminated in a major crisis on markets. The court releases
Parekh for a bond of Rs 5 lakh and orders him to present himself to the Central Bureau of
Investigation's office twice a week.
May 23: The Calcutta High Court restrains four defaulting stock brokers of Calcutta Stock Exchange
- Dinesh Kumar Singhania, Harish Chandra Biyani, Ashok Kumar Poddar and Ratan Lal Poddar from transferring their assets kept with banks and depository participants as well as immovable
properties.
July 2: UTI freezes sale and repurchase of units of its US-64 scheme and slashes dividend to 10%.
July 3: UTI chairman PS Subramanyam resigns in a midnight drama.
July 11: Supreme Court convicts Hiten Dalal to one year’s imprisonment.
July 20: Ex-UTI chairman PS Subramanyam and two UTI executive directors raided by CBI. A threemember committee set up to probe UTI’s investments.
August 6: Tata Finance files FIR against Managing Director Dilip Pendse, 5 others
August 8: Hiten Dalal surrenders before special court
August 10: CBI arrests Ketan Parekh in MMCB case
August 11: CSE Executive director Tapas Dutta sacked
August 24: Ketan gets bail in MMCB case. Pledges to deposit Rs 16 crore
September 6: Zee promoters sue to recover Rs 90 crore from Ketan Parekh. Hiten Dalal gets 3 years
of RI for defrauding Canbank mutual
September 7: GTB picks up 13% of Ketan Parekh’s company Triumph International against Parekh’s
dues of Rs 180 crore.
September 28: Nirmal Bang killed in road accident
October 15: SEBI chairman DR Mehta tells JPC that there was no scam

November 9: CBI arrests Harshad Mehta and his two brothers Sudhir and Ashwin on charges of
forgery and misappropriation.
November 27: Shankar Sharma and Devina Mehra announce that they will sue the government for Rs
500 crore and donate the money to charity
December 17: Shankar Sharma arrested by Enforcement Directorate (ED)
December 31: Big Bull Harshad Mehta dies of cardiac arrest

2002

January 9: Delhi High Court refutes First Global’s claim of harassment due to tehelka expose, noting
that ED acted a week before the expose.
February 11: ED sues Fist Global for selling HFCL shares to FIIs without RBI’s consent
March 1: Shankar Sharma released on bail
April 15: Ketan Parekh fails to pay Rs 7 crore of the Rs 16 crore he had promised to MMCB
April 19: BSE terminates the services of whistleblower AA Tirodkar as recommended by Enquiry
Committee headed by Justice BV Chavan.
May 28: ED charges 20 FIIs for FERA violation in the HFCL case
June 17: SEBI suspends broking licence of CSFB
July 3: Tatas file Rs 400 crore suit against Dilip Pendse
July 22-25: Draft JPC report leaked to the press. JPC members disown it
September 23: SEBI cancels First Global broking licence
September 25: Kolkata police arrest six brokers, ex-directors of CSE

October 9: Kolkata Police arrest BV Goud, former MD & CEO of SHCIL
November 2: RBI declares moratorium on Nedungadi Bank
November 29: Kolkata police arrest stock broker Ashok Poddar
December 2: Kolkata police arrest Ketan Parekh in Mumbai but he “falls ill” and gets bail
December 19 : JPC submits its report to the parliament

2003

January 14: Supreme Court upholds Harshad guilty in Maruti case.
January 20: Ketan surrenders before Kolkata court. In policy custody
June 7: DCA requests CLB for faster resolution of cases filed by it
June 19: Ketan parekh “agrees” to repay BOI’s dues
June 11: CBI arrests investor Shirish Manyar and broker Mukesh Babu
October 9: Supreme Court upturns Special Court order on 1992 scam, ordering Stanchart to return Rs
79 crore with 12% interest to Citibank, which in turn would pay a part to Canbank Mutual.
December 17: SEBI bans Ketan, his cousin and 7 associates for 14 years
December 23: Delhi police arrest Dilip Pendse

2004

March 8: SEBI cancels broking registration of Ketan’s broking entities

March 8: SEBI finds promoters of Aftek Infosys guilty of Fraudulent & Unfair Trade Practices. Bars
them from dealing in securities for one year.
April 8: Supreme Court upholds SAT’s order of reduced punishment on Nirmal Bang’s broking
entities
July 24: Global Trust Bank placed under moratorium by RBI
July 26: Amalgamation of GTB with Oriental Bank of Commerce

Authors’ Note

Circa 1992:
On the morning of 4th June 1992 the vast Arabian Sea, a few paces away from Madhuli, looked
calm. But on the third and fourth floors of the building, home of the first Indian stock market
superstar, Harshad Mehta, the atmosphere was tense. Harshad stood exposed for having taken money
from the State Bank of India and for not delivering securities.
For the past six weeks, Harshad had been trying to settle the problem commercially. But the
Central Bureau of Investigation had already been called in and Harshad’s appeals to allow him time to
pay back were being ignored. For the flashy, immensely wealthy Harshad and his clever brother
Ashwin, the situation was grim.
A little past 8 in the morning, some eighty people from CBI descended. Tactically, neither did they
interrogate the Mehtas nor gave any hint of arrests. They spread out through the apartment and started
turning things unsndle the scam investigation. Madhavan wanted to meet Harshad. The CBI officer
supervising the operation turned towards Ashwin and said:“I want you to come too.”Around 7.30 pm,
they started towards Kitab Mahal, one of the offices of the CBI.
Madhavan spoke to Harshad for about 10 minutes. And then calmly said: “I am arresting you.”
This included Ashwin and some of their employees. The arrest memos were served around midnight.
A few hours later, the CBI arrested the SBI’s deputy managing director CL Khemani, as well. A sordid
drama had begun.
Meanwhile, on Dalal Street, the phones had stopped ringing. There was mayhem, as one idol after
another crashed with a huge thud. Harshad Mehta, the icon of the equity cult was being grilled by CBI
in a police lock-up; Bhupen Dalal, suave and sophisticated,
had a hunted look; Jitu Shroff, running a long-established securities broking firm, was being
raided. Banks were sacking their employees and launching criminal cases against them.
It was a summer of panic as the biggest Indian financial scandal in living memory broke out.
Popularly known as the “scam” (an Americanism that does not figure in too many dictionaries) it
ravaged the stock markets, shook people’s faith in banks, tainted the reputation of foreign banks and
the image of India’s best-known bank, SBI. It immediately consumed one life - a high profile player in
the financial sector, MJ Pherwani and several others later. It yanked a go-getting minister, P
Chidambaram, a Planning Commission member, V Krishnamurthy, and the attorney general, G
Ramaswamy, out of their chairs.
The scam was so gigantic that it was easy to lose perspective. Larger than the health budget, larger
than the education budget, it made millions of rupees look like loose change. As the stock prices
started crashing all over the country, following the most explosive and absurd rise over the previous
six months, the scam - fifty times the size of Bofors - invaded middle-class homes like a whirlwind.
But it has also solved a big riddle: the much-speculated but never correctly-guessed reasons behind
the astounding bull phase that had gripped the stock markets from the last quarter of 1991 till the end
of March 1992. Within a week after the news on Harshad Mehta’s scam broke, it became clear that
Harshad’s main source of money was not smugglers, film stars and drug lords, though they may have
also indirectly benefited when Harshad made stock prices fly. His strategy was simpler, less dramatic.
He was the classic interloper.

He bought securities for SBI but got its officials to issue cheques to him and failed to deliver the
securities. In this scheme, he was aided by the blue-blooded ANZ Grindlays Bank and the National
Housing Bank, the fully-owned subsidiary of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Both freely credited
cheques to Harshad’s account.
Harshad also managed to operate SBI’s account maintained with RBI as his own, putting through
fictitious purchases and sales through that account and having his own bank account credited or
debited corresponding to such buying/selling.
Was Harshad the con man of the century? He certainly stands out in his sheer brazenness and
ambition. At thirty-seven, after trying his hand at over a dozen different businesses, he was suddenly
at the centre of a rags-to-riches fairy tale that sometimes left even him perplexed. Overseeing a 15,000
square feet apartment in Madhuli, at Worli seaface in Bombay, a putting green, a fleet of cars
including Toyota’s top-selling luxury model Lexus, Harshad Mehta was on his way to becoming one
of the richest men in India.
Harshad, and to some extent, brokers like Pallav Sheth and traders like K Dharmapal of Fairgrowth
Financial suddenly proved that the short cut to getting rich quickly is getting shorter and shorter. It
took Dhirubhai Ambani decades to attain superstar status. Harshad managed it in just a few years
without Ambani’s hassles of setting up manufacturing assets, battling the government and the press.
Harshad, banks, brokers and businessmen had merely to dip their hands into the money sloshing about
in the inefficient banking system.
It was so easy that the great and good of the business world, especially the foreign firms, got
involved. The Standard Chartered Bank was caught dealing in thousands of crores worth of securities
from a shady broker, who often gave no contract notes and had the transactions all in his mind. With
telling effect, the scam soon spread fast, well beyond engulfing a streetsmart upstart like Harshad. Its
other, unexpected, murkier stream tarnished venerable names like Bhupen Dalal, who has inherited a
100-year-old broking firm and was passing on to his two sons a rich legacy.
Stanchart, as the bank is commonly referred to, was also recklessly dealing in slips of paper called
bank receipts (BRs) issued by tiny banks with a few crores of capital. No less shocking
was the role of its head office in London, which despite internal and external inspections remained
blissfully unaware that its operaion in India was in tatters. ANZ Grindlays, though not an integral part
of the scam, was caught crediting cheques from the National Housing Bank and the Power Finance
Corporation into Harshad’s account. Harshad used that money as his own.
Caught unawares, the players publicly bumbled, aided by poor PR strategy. Stanchart and ANZ
Grindlays, two of the largest foreign banks in India, persistently refused to speak openly to the press,
provoking a rash of critical writing. They form one of the richest case studies on PR disaster.
Grindlays was portrayed as impudently quarrelling with RBI.
Stanchart emerged as a bumbling bank that over-reached itself in a greedy but reckless pursuit of
bumper profits. It first stonewalled the press. Then it flew down John Pank from London to handle the
disoriented PR department, which suddenly called a press conference. It was a dismal effort. The high
and mighty bankers from the city of London hummed and hawed in response to specific queries and
left journalists bewildered as to why they were called in the first place.
The head of the Bank of America in India, Vikram Talwar had been denying that the bank had done
anything wrong till the third report of the Janakiraman Committee blew his cover. When on 22nd
April, The Times of India asked MN Goiporia, chairman of the State Bank, about Harshad’s problems

in squaring up certain transactions, he flatly denied it. RBI Governor called a press conference to deny
something, which he had not even checked on.
The smartest of all, Citibank, was seen as smug and arrogant despite drafting a banker to undertake
press relations. It also hired Roger Pereira the high priest of PR to act as a buffer. Pereira, perennially
unctuous when face-to-face but malicious and nasty behind our backs, sought out one of us to
“favour” him with facts and a “perspective” on Citibank. His spiel: he wanted to know as much as
possible in order to decide whether to accept the assignment or not. The fact is, he had already signed
up with Citibank. The meeting was a set up, designed to draw out vital information and to slyly find
out how much we know, to be reported back to the client. Apart from such craftiness, planting stories
and maligning select presspersons, what else do most PR agencies offer anyway?
The person worst affected in the scandal was the most forthcoming of all. Despite the fact that the
initial press report in the Times has precipitated it all, Harshad bore no ill will. He gave journalists
time and information and complimented them for their work even when some of the articles were
against his interest. This was a clever move to keep the press on his side but there was also a streak of
pure enthusiasm, a sunny world-view that made him capable of appreciating anything remarkable.

Circa 2001:
In India, the problem has never been the existence of laws. The bigger issue is enforcement of
those laws. There is an insider-trading law now but the market is rife with insider trading. Off-market
badla is illegal but it was being done on the floor of the Calcutta stock exchange. There are laws
against market manipulation and price-rigging but nobody is ever caught. Who regulates companies?
There are agencies called the Registrar of Companies and Department of Company Affairs but have
you ever heard of them taking any action against anybody? The Scam 2001 is readymade for them to
probe funds diversion by companies like Zee, Global Trust Bank and Himachal Futuristic for stock
market operations, but only on the prodding of JPC did they start moving their muscles. Market
players know this too well. According to an enlightening conversation one of us had with a Citibank
employee in 1990, the bank viewed the Reserve Bank’s rules merely as recommendations, not the law
of the land.
In fact, regulatory and investigative agencies like RBI, CBI, Income Tax Department, and the
Enforcement Directorate often meticulously collect evidence and then can it. That emboldens the
market players more until things just go out of hand again.
Another scam was waiting to happen again. The wonder is that it took so long. And another scam
will happen once it is clear that collectively JPC, SEBI, RBI and various arms of the government want
to bury the Scam of 2001 and its culprits.
The Scam of 2001 was simple. Massive price rigging, over-trading, huge losses, to support which,
money was drawn out, of colluding companies and banks. This was hardly new. However, information
on the collusion between Ketan Parekh, his price-rigging, diversion of funds from high-profile
companies and banks was dribbling out only thanks to some tough questioning by a couple of JPC
members.
Just out of the CBI custody in May 2001, Ketan Parekh threatened to sue Bank of India for
“defamation”, because it dared to complain to CBI. And yet, by late July, more staggering details of
Scam 2001 emerged. CBI called a press conference to announce that it had unearthed and frozen a
Swiss bank account containing $80 million, whose beneficiary was Ketan Parekh. JPC’s questioning
led to more offshore companies being unearthed- following the revelation in May that Rs 2900 crore

were transferred out of the country through five Overseas Corporate Bodies between March 1999 to
March 2001. SEBI revealed in July that it has discovered six more OCBs used by Ketan Parekh for
“cornering and parking of stocks”.
One of these was Delgrada Ltd, which issued 1.75 crore shares of Zee Telefilms on its acquisition
of Zee Multimedia Worldwide. SEBI says that Subhash Chandra, Chairman of Zee Telefilms, was the
sole beneficiary of this Delgrada. Some of these shares were later sold through Ketan’s firm Triumph
International and about Rs 450 crore was remitted to Mauritius.
SEBI also disclosed to the JPC that Zee Telefilms had directly lent Rs 515 crore to Parekh in
March 2001, by borrowing the funds from various sources, including Global Trust Bank to stop him
from going under. Himachal Futuristic, whose promoter Vinay Maloo is a close buddy of Ketan had
organised Rs 700 crore for him. Add all this to SEBI’s information that Ketan had sent over Rs 2700
crore to Kolkata brokers between January 2000 to March 2001, Rs 2900 crore vanished overseas and
CBI’s discovery of $80 million and you have more or less the true dimensions of the Scam 2001. It
comes to roughly Rs 6400 crore- larger than the first estimate of Rs 5000 crore on Scam 1992.
Despite such startling revelations, Indian regulators have been dragging their feet over disciplinary
and supervisory action like price manipulation, insider trading, oppression of minority shareholders
etc. Banks and institutional investors such as the beleaguered Unit Trust of India, which was buying
up Zee shares and funding companies to help Ketan in March 2001, have been acting dumb instead of
filing suits. That left Ketan Parekh free to influence politicians and certain JPC members, threaten
banks with defamation and make allegations against CBI while the regulators quietly plodded on with
their endless “investigations”. Sounds the same as in the Scam of 1992.
One interesting difference between the two financial scandals separated by nine years was the role
of media and politicians. In 1992, the press was glorifying Harshad Mehta and brokers like him
without asking the most elementary question: What was the source of their funds. Some journalists
were part of Harshad’s charmed circle, but even they seemed to have been happy with just stock tips.
A couple of senior business journalists tried to support Harshad initially but later backed off once they
realised the extent of his mischief in SBI. Most publications, however, went after the scam with a
degree of seriousness and a lot of information made it to the public domain.
In 2001, sections of the media played a more dubious role. At the junior level many routinely
wrote excitedly about K-10 stocks without mentioning the word price-rigging. And two executives of
the National Stock Exchange (NSE) who were asked to leave on the suspicion of leaking information
to brokers, immediately found berths in two top pink papers!
What was remarkable was the wide circle of people that the scamsters had cultivated among
politicians and media. Not only did they have senior editors of widely-circulated papers as open
sympathisers, they were probably funding the operations of some others and had a complete lock on
what should be written and how. Two well-known editors of struggling newspapers joined in a savage
personal attack against us. It was probably the first time that journalists were passing off personal
abuse about another journalist as first page “news”. The Asian Age and The Pioneer neither of which
has any readership worth talking about, but are backed by dubious financiers, twisted some facts about
us, made up some others, laced it with nasty innuendo and printed it on the front page.
This was new. There are just too many loss-making newspapers controlled by businessmen and
politicians. It is easy for scamsters to hire one of these rags and use it to peddle scurrilous writing. For
instance, a third editor, whose insignificant media company was funded by Ketan Parekh, suddenly
turned into an expert on ‘bulls and bears’. He even found a platform in the largest selling English daily

to preach that bears destroy the economy. By “national wealth”, he obviously meant market value of
shady companies rigged up by speculators. Indeed, some people were trying to generate a debate on
whether investigative writing was hurting the country.
Certain sections of the media were so well-funded, that to them the Scam of 2001 was a trigger to
malign whoever was speaking the truth rather than an attempt to expose the actual wrongdoings. Zee
News, which did extensive re-runs of the tehelka tapes, did not even seem to notice that rigging of the
Zee scrip was at the centre of the scam. Isn’t it surprising that neither The Asian Age nor The Pioneer
had anything much to say about Ketan Parekh’s shenanigans and his political friends? Most seem to
have also missed the implication of Parekh’s direct investment in certain media companies. This was a
key difference between 1992 and 2001. The stakes had become bigger, the means dirtier and people’s
response more indifferent.
The only exception is the Indian Express group. At a time when so many newspapers were handin-glove with scamsters or were busy reporting society tattle, only The Express continued to support
investigative reporting despite enormous pressure. For that credit is entirely due to Shekhar Gupta,
Editor-in-Chief & CEO. If the pressure tactics of corporate houses and scamsters succeeded, it was
mainly because the reading public tends to take the freedom of the press for granted. They expect
newspapers and journalist to fight their battles but are unconcerned about what goes on behind the
scenes.
Circa 2005:

The 2001 edition of this book, which was sold in two years, stopped at the dramatic event of one
midnight in late July 2001, when UTI chairman PS Subramanyam was asked to resign. Much has
happened since then, involving both the scam-tainted personalities and the course of investigation.
Harshad Mehta, the swashbuckling sultan of speculation in 1991-92 passed away at Thane civil
hospital where he was rushed from the Thane jail. He was under police custody in connection with
another phase of unending investigation. With his demise, public interest in the 1992 scam reduced.
But scores of criminal suits and hundreds of civil suits continue to drag through the Special Court that
was, set up under a separate act of parliament to deal with that scam.
But events seemed to have a way of catching up with various scam-tainted personalities. Rajendra
Banthia, a close crony of Harshad Mehta, landed up in a Gujarat jail in connection with Nedungadi
Bank, whose shares he had bought in 1992 along with two broker friends. In a predictable replay of
regulatory lapses, the RBI allowed the bank to collapse and then forced a quick merger with Punjab
National Bank to bury the dirt.
The Scam of 2001, more limited in scope, has created far less after-shocks. Our apprehensions
documented in the 2001 edition proved correct; various government agencies have let most of the
scamsters and all industrialists get away. This edition has updated and expanded some of these
developments. It shows that there has been no change in the quality of supervision by the regulatory
th
agencies. The most recent proof, if such proof was needed, came on 24
July 2004 when the RBI
placed the notorious Global Trust Bank under moratorium, after having ignored many red flags and
even offering covert support to the bank. The government engineered a shotgun marriage for GTB and

the scamsters behind GTB collapse escaped. Some even made money selling the stock ahead of the
collapse. The more things change, the more they remain the same.

Chapter 1
The Scam Surfaces
Within a month, a
bank had gone under;
the CBI had been
called in to nab the
biggest player in the
stock market; and a
pillar of the financial
establishment had
died under
mysterious
circumstances. But all
this was just the
beginning.

It was early morning at Palani, a small, sleepy town 150 kilometres from
Coimbatore. Palani has had no claim to fame except for its temple atop a
hill. It has no industry, no major railhead, and it has never produced a
luminary. But on 12 th April 1992, Palani was to witness a historic event.
Only five persons could have sensed that. Harshad Mehta? He hadn’t a clue.
He hadn’t even heard of Palani.
At five on that Sunday morning, in one of the rooms of a small hotel
called Subam, RL Kamat, a deputy general manager, funds management
department of State Bank of India, was out of bed. Unassuming and honest,
Kamat had arrived from Bombay the previous evening. By six he had had a
bath, dressed up and stepped out. He was headed for Palani’s landmark, the
temple.

He had been there the previous evening too. But not on a pilgrimage.
What Kamat set out to do in a nondescript town hundreds of kilometres
away from Bombay would later turn out to be among the first steps to shatter
the Harshad Mehta myth.
Kamat’s mission in Palani was to bring back to Bombay one of his
colleagues, R Sitaraman. Sitaraman, a junior management grade officer,
would later emerge as the key figure in Harshad Mehta’s scheme to pick up
money from SBI without securities. But on that Sunday morning, Sitaraman
was merely a suspect and that too within the bank; nobody had imagined the
extent of his wrongdoing. He was wanted as he was the only one who could
throw light on what his bosses feared was a massive fraud.
Simply put, SBI was short by Rs 574 crore in securities. The antiquated,
manually written books kept at the Public Debt Office of Reserve Bank of
India showed that Rs 1170.95 crore of an 11.5% Central Government loan of
2010 maturity was standing against SBI’s name on 29 th February. The
figure was Rs 1744.95 crore in SBI’s books – a clear gap of Rs 574 crore.
But the discrepancy was not apparent.
The PDO statement given to SBI had been overwritten, i.e., falsified, to
make the figure 1170 look like 1670, covering the gap of Rs 500 crore and
bringing it close to SBI’s figure. It was like dis-covering that your bank
account, which ought to have had a balance of,say, Rs 1700 showed, in the
bank’s pass book, a balance of Rs 1000 which was later falsified to Rs 1600.
On the 11 th floor of SBI’s main office, this startling discovery was made
over the week ending 11th April. Between the 6 th and the 9 th , three
officers in the treasury department – RL Kamat, TPN Rao (assistant
manager) and their boss, CL Khemani (deputy managing director, treasury
and investment management) – had uncovered the Rs 500 crore gap along
with other discrepancies. The man responsible was Sitaraman, who was
working in the securities division of the Bombay main branch. His job was
to put through the transactions at the branch level as directed by Khemani
and Kamat from their base in the head office.
However, Sitaraman had a mind of his own. Or rather, a mind that was
owned by Harshad Mehta. He did what Mehta wanted him to, not what

Khemani ordered. Of course, he kept confirming to Khemani that he was
putting the right deals through.
From a difference of Rs 574 crore in February, the gap between the SBI’s
books and that of the PDO grew to Rs 1022 crore by March 1992. When the
full impact of the fraud hit the SBI top brass, Sitaraman was on a train
somewhere between Bombay and Coimbatore. It was the first day of his
seven-day leave. He and his wife were taking his four-year-old son to Palani
for the mundan ceremony.
But unknown to him, at 9.30 p.m. on the night of 10 th April in Khemani’s
room, his fate was changing. Kamat was planning to set out on his trail; to
pull him out from his leave as soon as possible. By noon the next day, Kamat
was on the flight to Coimbatore. But would Sitaraman be in Palani? Kamat
made sure of that by discreetly checking with Sitaraman’s mother, the date
of the ceremony. It was the 12 th .
As he fastened his seat belt on the mid-morning flight for Coimbatore,
Kamat was fully prepared for all outcomes. He would have Sitaraman
arrested in case he attempted to flee. Kamat had contacted the Palani-based
regional manager of SBI and asked for security help. When he met the
regional manager and the security officer at Coimbatore it was 2.30 in the
afternoon. They hired a car and reached Palani at 5.30 in the evening. But
where was Sitaraman?
The regional manager was an influential man in that area. So, when the
three set out to search the main hotels and four dharamsalas they had easy
access to the registers. Sitaraman’s name was not listed anywhere. Could he
have gone to the hilltop temple? A religious procession was winding its way
up the steep hill and the three went along with it. By 7 p.m. they were on the
temple premises. It was a futile search. After going around the temple
several times, they gave up. They would search again the following day.
12 th April: Kamat stepped out of the Subam Hotel at 6 a.m., ready to
resume the search. Unknown to him, Sitaraman had entered Palani an hour
earlier. By 6.30, Kamat and his two associates were at the temple. The
structure of the temple was in their favour. It had many entry points but only

one exit. They parked themselves in front of that exit. For three hours
nothing happened. Then, at 9.45 Kamat spotted him.
Sitaraman, his wife and their son were in the midst of the mundan rites.
Kamat stayed calm, forced a smile, moved forward and made eye contact
with Sitaraman. When he noticed Kamat, Sitaraman jumped out of his skin.
“He was extremely disturbed”, recalls Kamat.
Kamat played it cool. He walked up to Sitaraman.

“I am waiting nearby”, he said. Sitaraman merely nodded. Kamat and the
other two men went into a restroom and waited for Sitaraman. After some
time he walked in with his wife and son.

“Khemani has sent me to take you back”, opened Kamat. “We have a big
problem on our hands. Please come to Bombay and tell all that you know.”
Kamat’s brief was to inspire confidence in Sitaraman, not fear.
Sitaraman didn’t say much. A storm was blowing inside him. His wife,
who works for Central Bank of India, was clueless. She started complaining
that Sitaraman worked long hours in the office and so had little time for his
son. “Why can’t you transfer him to some other department?” she asked
Kamat, little realising that Sitaraman wasn’t working late for nothing. They
ordered masala dosas and spent some more time chatting. Sitarman spoke
very little. Around 1 p.m. they climbed down the hill and went to
Sitaraman’s hotel where he packed his bags. The family would move into
Subam where Kamat was staying.
Sitaraman, dark and medium-built, was apparently a competent officer. In
1991-92, when the bonds market was highly active and volatile, he rose to
the pressure of an increased workload. “He could easily handle 40-50 deals a
day, often working on Saturdays to clear the backlog”, says Kamat.
Sitaraman’s return journey had been planned via Madras, from where he
was going to fly back to Bombay. Kamat changed that. He planned to take
the family to Coimbatore and fly from there. After they all moved into
Subam, Kamat went to the SBI branch and called up Khemani to let him

know that he had got Sitaraman. “He has the SGLs”, Kamat assured
Khemani. Khemani was very pleased. But it was premature.
Kamat told him that they would be in the office by Monday afternoon.
They hired a car and reached Coimbatore around 5 p.m. While Kamat
checked into a hotel called Annapurna Lodging, the Sitaramans spent the
night with one of their relatives. The next morning they joined Kamat at the
hotel. Since they had some time before the flight took off, they even
managed to shop to buy sarees.
During the flight they spoke little. Sitaraman confirmed to Kamat that he
had the SGLs with him. At 3 p.m. Sitaraman and Kamat stepped into the
head office (known within the bank as the central office) at Nariman Point.
They went straight to Khemani’s room on the 11 th floor. The three had a
brief chat. Khemani queried Sitaraman about the discrepancy. Cornered,
Sitaraman changed his story.

“I have BRs (bank receipts) not SGLs”, he said.

1

“But you said that you have the SGLs”, asked Kamat.
“Where are the BRs?” queried Khemani.
“I have them in the branch”, replied Sitaraman.
“Kamat will go with you. Hand them over to him”, Khemani said.
When they reached the branch, Sitaraman confessed that he did not have
even the BRs. “Harshad has them now”, he said. “He has taken the BRs with
the promise to buy SGLs.” This tallied with the story Harshad had told the
SBI top brass on Saturday the 11 th . But Sitaraman was still lying.
Khemani’s worst suspicions were true. Actually, Sitaraman’s game was up
early March, the day that Khemani had told Kamat to start securities
reconciliation work so that SBI’s books balanced with those of the PDO on
31 st March. The idea was to keep the books reconciled at least till February,

so that there would be no difficulty in reconciling just one month’s
transactions later. 2
One week passed by. The reconciliation statement never came. Khemani
was getting edgy. He kept pushing Kamat for the statement. Kamat, in turn,
was told by the Bombay main branch that the reconciliation would take
another three to four days at the most. Sitaraman was trying his best to fudge
the books in those weeks. But he was caught in the wide and intricate web of
transactions. After all, in just one month, March, SBI transacted securities
worth Rs 8,700 crore, a quarter of the whole year’s transactions.
On the evening of 6 th April, a man from the Bombay branch delivered the
statement to Khemani. Since it was late, Khemani put it in a plastic folder
and went home. He took it out the next morning and looked at it closely.
There was overwriting, alterations and can-cellations in the statement. Some
securities that SBI had bought had not been included. To top it all, there was
a difference of Rs 74 crore between what Sitaraman showed (Rs 1744.95
crore) and what the PDO reported (Rs 1670.95 crore). Khemani became
suspicious. He called the assistant manager, TPN Rao, and asked him to go
to the branch to check the accuracy of Sitaraman’s statement. His brief was
to crosscheck the SBI statement with the RBI’s books. Rao made a
preliminary enquiry and then, on 9 th April, returned to the branch.

“Please come with me to the PDO”, Rao requested Sitaraman.
“I have a lot of work to complete. Why don’t you go on your own?” asked
Sitaraman. Rao persisted with his request. “The staff at the PDO knows you
well. We can finish the reconciliation faster if you help.”
Sitaraman was reluctant. “I have to start for Palani tomorrow for my son’s
mundan ”, he said. And then added: “Don’t worry about the discrepancies. I
will sort them out when I come back from leave on the 17 th .”

“I have instructions to set them right today”, said an insistent Rao.
They left for the PDO, a few minutes’ drive from the SBI office. The PDO
is fittingly housed in the old RBI building, a stately old structure situated

opposite the modern, twenty-six storied edifice that is now RBI’s main
office. Sitaraman introduced Rao to a few clerks there and went back. Rao
got them to set right the small, genuine discrepancies. But when they looked
into SBI’s balance of the 11.5% central loan of 2010 maturity, the fraud leapt
from the pages of the antique ledger of the supreme banking authority of the
country. It read Rs 1170.95 crore. Somebody had altered the PDO statement
issued to SBI so that Rs 1170.95 crore read Rs 1670.95 crore. A gigantic
banking fraud right in the backyard of the banker’s banker, the supercop
whose job it is to discover banking frauds!
One month after that fateful day, callous officials in the ministry of
finance, an overzealous Central Bureau of Investigation and the sharp-witted
governor of RBI worked in tandem to deftly shift the blame for the fraud on
to SBI. The RBI governor simultaneously played a major role in uncovering
parts of scam but in the charged atmosphere of early May 1992, when
Parliament was in session, what everyone wanted was some action. Never
mind who was steamrollered.
In a brazen display of power, under the prevailing chaos, every senior
person in SBI who had anything to do with the treasury department was
harassed and hounded. What about the clerks in the PDO who were later
found to be hand-in-glove with the brokers? The CBI had no case against
them. Who were the clerks reporting to? The names were never revealed.
None of the RBI staff were charged for the fraud or even properly
interrogated. Indeed, RBI ‘suspended’ some of them. But nothing more. The
final twist to the farce was provided by the expert committee set up by RBI
to probe the scam, popularly known as the Janakiraman Committee. Hear
what this committee has to say about the PDO office: “Functioning of the
SGL section in the PDO in general is satisfactory.”
Rao returned from PDO and broke the bad news. “That means another Rs
500 crore of shortfall in 11.5% 2010”, remarked a depressed Khemani. (The
precise amount was Rs 499 crore.) Sitaraman had already gone on leave and
so Rao and Kamat went back to the branch the next day (10 th April) to find
out the reason behind the shortfall. It was a transaction of 14 th December for
which the bank had already made the payment but had not received the
securities (i.e., the SGLs) from Punjab National Bank and State Bank of
Saurashtra.

It was much more complicated than that, though they did not realise it
then: Khemani had sold Rs 845.09 crore of securities to PNB and bought
securities worth Rs 725.58 crore from PNB and Rs 98.40 crore from SBS – a
net inflow of Rs 21.11 crore. What Sitaraman recorded was receipts of Rs
226.12 crore from seven banks and payments of Rs 205.01 crore to six banks
and Harshad Mehta – again showing an inflow of Rs 21.11 crore to
camouflage the fraud.
They discovered another thing, something that later emerged as a common
thread in the securities scam. The entries Sitaraman recorded were invented.
The money did not go to the banks from which the securities were shown to
have been purchased, though the branch (Sitaraman) dutifully told the
central office (Khemani) that it did. The money went to the broker who
struck the deal.
The broker? Harshad Mehta.
Kamat and Rao returned to the central office at 6.30 in the evening.
Khemani immediately contacted his boss PV Subba Rao, one of the two
managing directors. Khemani and Subba Rao made up the investment
committee that decided how SBI should deploy its funds. In reality
Khemani, a genial soft-spoken man, was taking all the investment decisions,
and very astute ones. His department must have contributed crores to the
SBI’s bumper profits in 1991-92. On the evening of 9 th April, however,
Khemani, who was a heart patient, felt a kind of pressure he had never felt
before. He reached for the phone to talk to Subba Rao.

“I have to discuss something very serious with you”, he said. Subba Rao
called him in.
Khemani explained everything and asked, “Do you think we should file an
FIR with the police complaining of a fraud?”
Rao reflected for a while, then said, “But we must recover the money
first.”
This was a commercially sound step – to secure the money first, then take
legal action. Later, the CBI, in a brutal attempt to prove criminality, would

do just the reverse and thereby jeopardise thousands of crores of taxpayers’
money. Ironically, SBI had to pay heavily later for trying to secure the
money first. If only it had filed a police complaint, its officers would have
been the accusers, not the accused and Khemani and his colleagues would
rightly be credited with discovering the fraud instead of having committed it.
This is precisely what KV Krishnamurthy did as chairman of Bank of India,
when faced with a shortfall from Ketan Parekh in March 2001.
During discussions that night, Subba Rao called R Sinha, chief general
manager (vigilance). They discussed the course of action and then planned to
go to the Chairman, Maneck N Goiporia’s house. But they were told that
Goiporia was out meeting somebody and would return only after 10 p.m. It
was then that Khemani and Subba Rao decided that Sitaraman should be
called back to find out if he was holding SGLs or BRs. 3
They even sent somebody over to the branch and broke open Sitaraman’s
drawer. It was a desperate move. There was nothing there.
On the night of 10 th April, in Subba Rao’s room, the SBI top brass took
three decisions. First, to send Kamat to Palani to bring Sitaraman back.
Second, to start an immediate enquiry by the vigilance department. Third, to
apprise the chairman the next morning and chalk out plans to recover the
money. (At that stage, they did not know the exact amount involved.)
The next day, Kamat took off for Coimbatore while Subba Rao and
Khemani met Goiporia. The discussions clarified two things: first, the
transactions done by the branch were different from what the central office
had instructed. Second, the bulk of the shortfall was due to non-delivery of
the transactions done on 14 th December through Harshad Mehta. It was
clear to them that Sitaraman and Harshad were working together. This
crystallised SBI’s position. At that stage, RBI, which later claimed to have
uncovered the scam, had no clue about the exact nature of the fraud, not
even about the falsification of the PDO statement, in its own backyard,
which proved the Sitaraman-Harshad nexus.
When Khemani bared it all, Goiporia may not have been totally surprised.
If Khemani knew something that Goiporia didn’t know, Goiporia knew
something too. He was working in tandem with RBI to choke off Harshad.

This was part of RBI’s “nab Harshad” plot which later gave the RBI
governor, S Venkitaramanan, the strength to claim “I caught the thief” and
secured him the finance minister’s backing when some powerful MPs
wanted him out. But more about that later.
On 11 th April, as the Harshad-Sitaraman-PDO link became clear to
Goiporia, Subba Rao and Khemani, they decided to call Harshad and ask
him about the 14 th December transactions done through him for which there
were no entries at the branch. By that time the chief general manager
(vigilance) had come to know that SBS, one of the selling banks, had no
such transaction with SBI on the date stated. Later, another transaction with
Harshad, of 21 st March, turned out to be bad. Harshad was supposed to give
Rs 170 crore of an 11.5% loan of 2007. The money went out but no
securities came in. Clearly, Harshad had picked up the money and Sitaraman
had covered for him by showing fictitious buying from PNB, SBS and other
banks. Harshad owed SBI Rs 499 crore and Rs 170 crore in two sets of
transactions.

“I feel we should immediately call Harshad and ask him to explain. We
must ask him to face the chairman. That will create pressure on him”, said
Khemani. Strangely, Goiporia refused.

“I think you should handle it yourself”, he told Khemani. “If it becomes
impossible then call me.”
Khemani was unhappy. He felt that a tough word or two from the
chairman would be useful, keeping in mind the magnitude of the fraud. At
around 12.30 in the afternoon, Khemani placed a call to Harshad. “Please
come and see me immediately. It is urgent”, he told Harshad.
Though Harshad had stopped dealing in securities, he readily agreed to
come. He may have known about the discovery of the fraud by then. From
his office to Khemani’s is a two-minute walk. Quite possibly, Harshad drove
down because he entered Khemani’s room at 12.30 sharp.

“You were supposed to deliver these securities...” started Khemani.

“Yes I know”, interrupted Harshad. “Instead of SGLs, PNB and SBS have
given BRs. I have taken the BRs from Sitaraman to get SGLs from the two
banks. But as you know, the Income Tax has sealed my offices. I don’t have
access to these BRs now.”

“That is your problem”, said Khemani. “Either you give us the securities
or get the counterparty banks to pay.” After a moment’s pause, he added,
“You must start making payments immediately.”
That was a tall order even for Harshad. His first payment – a cheque of Rs
243.18 crore from ANZ Grindlays Bank – came in on Monday the 13 th and
then nothing for the rest of the week. Meanwhile a worried Khemani
threatened, begged, cajoled and pleaded with Harshad to return the money.
What partly helped were the holidays between 14 th and 18 th April when the
market was closed. On 18 th Khemani buzzed Subba Rao. “Call Harshad and
force him to meet the chairman”, he told him. Subba Rao agreed. Harshad
got a call from SBI the same day and turned up in Khemani’s room.
This time, he most certainly came in his car, his Rs 45-lakh Toyota Lexus,
the world’s top-selling, new luxury model, driven by a white-gloved
chauffeur. It proved to be a fatal error. Word leaked out that Harshad had
problems in reconciling his transactions with SBI.
Harshad was taken to Subba Rao’s room and from there to the chairman.
He was at his voluble best. He promised to square up in the next few days. “I
am an honest man. I have all the BRs”, he asserted. (Later, in jail, he told
Khemani, “I am sorry for what has happened.” Khemani probably felt like
pulling a trigger on him.) The rest of the time (almost 30 minutes) Harshad
delivered a monologue on his investment philosophy. He had done the same
thing with V Krishnamurthy, member, Planning Commission, his associates
and on 1 st April, with the RBI governor.
The cornerstone of Harshad’s philosophy was his pet replacement cost
theory, under which existing companies ought to be valued at the much
higher cost of replacing them and not at the much lower historical cost as per
conventional accounting methods. Looked at this way, many Indian
companies appeared undervalued and were, therefore, great scrips to buy.

Harshad’s other theory was that the Indian economy was turning around and
it was time we invited foreign investors into Indian markets.
On the 18 th Harshad gave three more Grindlays cheques totalling Rs 142
crore and two more, on the 20 th , of Rs 160 crore. Two visits by the famous
Harshad to the SBI headquarters within one week set tongues wagging. A
former SBI employee picked up the gossip. He passed it on to The Times of
India on 22 nd April. A day earlier, Harshad had given in another Rs 5 crore.
Only one cheque remained – of just Rs 6.35 crore – which Harshad would
deliver on the 24 th . Just one more day and Harshad would have made it and
SBI would have recovered its money and, at the most, suspended Sitaraman.
The 23 rd day of April was like any other. Except that The Times of India
front-paged a three-column story innocuously headlined, “Broker asked to
square up Rs 500 crore”. The broker was not named. He was referred to as
the Big Bull. That was due to Goiporia’s stonewalling. When he was asked
whether it was true that Harshad Mehta had large outstandings with SBI, he
came up with vague answers.

“Was there a problem of reconciliation with Harshad?” The Times asked
Goiporia. “We deal in thousands of crores of securities. We do have
reconciliation problems from time to time.”
“Is Harshad Mehta unable to pay Rs 500 crore?” Goiporia responded:
“Harshad Mehta? The broker? I can’t comment”, and he disconnected the
phone.
Khemani was more categorical. “There is no problem here. It is
completely false. A reconciliation gap of Rs 20 to Rs 30 crore is always
there”, he said, reducing the sum considerably.
Soon after, Goiporia was asked to go on leave. As months of revelations
would prove, SBI, unknown to its chairman, had a great deal to do with
Harshad. And journalists’ imagination fell way short of guessing the true
dimensions of the securities scandal. There was deep rot within the system
that even shrewd market players like Khemani were fully unaware of.

On 23 rd April, when the story broke, the question that vexed everybody
was, where did Mehta get the money from to pay back SBI. The answer was
quite startling. He picked it virtually from the RBI. The money came from
National Housing Bank, a fully-owned subsidiary of RBI. The news that an
RBI outfit had helped a broker to cover his fraud broke in early May when
Parliament was in full session. Though no Member of Parliament understood
the highly technical nature of the scam, they were smart enough to convert it
into a political hand grenade.
On 29 th April, NKP Salve, deputy leader of the Congress in the Rajya
Sabha, told Manmohan Singh that since he was the finance minister, “I
would have thought it was best to go home.” Singh, however, failed to even
make a statement in the House because he did not have enough facts. To
control the MPs baying for blood, CBI was called in the same day. From that
point, the scam ceased to be a commercial problem; it became a political and
criminal issue, ravaging the markets and sending shivers down the spines of
bureaucrats and bankers.
On 1 st May, The Indian Express exposed another scam. It reported how
the United Commercial Bank had discounted two bills drawn by the Mehtas
on their two main companies, Mazda and Growmore, to give them money to
boost the prices of a host of scrips, most notably, of Reliance Industries.
Reliance was then anxious to place its equity issue overseas and Mehta
presumably colluded by buying 10 lakh shares that sent the price shooting to
Rs 400 on 28 th March from just Rs 285 on 20 th March. The story put
further pressure on Harshad. On 5 th May, The Indian Express exposed the
NHB angle.
That brought into focus, MJ Pherwani, chairman of NHB who, as the
chairman of the Unit Trust of India till 1989, had earned the title “Big Bull”
for his aggressive buying strategy. Harshad took that mantle in 1991-92 by
his frenzied buying. In an unmatched irony, the earlier Big Bull was
suspected of helping the present Big Bull to tide over his financial crisis.
Pherwani, of course, consistently denied that he had anything to do with
NHB’s money flowing into Mehta’s account. On 8 th May, Pherwani
resigned from NHB and later, from three other institutions he was heading.

Unknown to Mehta, Pherwani and other players in the drama, another
huge scam was being unearthed in the plush offices of the Standard
Chartered Bank, Canbank Financial Services and Canbank Mutual Fund.
Mehta’s unreconciled BRs forced the lid off this scam. When the RBI
governor returned from Washington, he set up a committee to probe and
ordered a BR reconciliation among all banks to flush out the outstanding
BRs.
Bankers sat in batches around a table on 19 th May, matching each other’s
positions as reflected in outstanding BRs. At the end of the next day,
Stanchart emerged with the highest outstanding position. It was found
carrying BRs worth Rs 225 crore issued by the Bank of Karad and Rs 530
crore issued by the Metropolitan Co-operative Bank. Next was Canfina,
holding Karad BRs worth Rs 425 crore. CanMutual was sitting on Rs 103
crore of SGLs issued by Karad. The BRs were bogus – issued without any
underlying securities – and the SGLs which were one-year-old, had bounced.
Both the Bank of Karad and the Metro Bank were tiny, private banks with
a net worth a fraction of the hundreds of crores outstanding against their
names. Karad had been caught misusing BRs in 1991. Alarmed by the
magnitude and complexity of the fraud, RBI ordered the liquidation of the
Bank of Karad on 27 th May and superseded the board of the Metro Bank.
A week before this, something else happened. At 2.30 a.m. on 21 st May,
Pherwani died. It was a mystery nobody wanted to investigate. Reports state
that he had a heart attack. But his death certificate was signed by an
anaesthetist. His face was covered – unusual for a Hindu – so people who
came to the funeral didn’t really see him. Was it a natural death? Could it
have been suicide?
The story was getting complex and gory. Within a month of the scam
being exposed, a bank had closed down, CBI had been called in to nab the
current Big Bull, the biggest player in the stock market, and a pillar of the
Indian financial establishment, the original Big Bull, had died under
mysterious circumstances. But all this was just the beginning.

Chapter 2
Banker, Broker, Sucker, Thief
“We had become the
principals while the
banks were acting as
brokers. Banks could
decide on the
brokerage they would
pay. We used to tease
them by asking how
much bankerage they
would charge on the
deals we created for
them.”

DURING the summer of ’92, new revelations about widespread
corruption in the money market left not only the lay public, but financial
journalists, even key players in the financial sector and regulatory authorities
aghast. It was a world few knew existed.
Harshad Mehta’s rags-to-riches story, including his fleet of cars and a
15,000 square foot house with huge terrace lawns, became public
knowledge. Much less known were facts about traders earning a salary of Rs
2.5 crore; one-year-old finance companies buying and selling shares worth
Rs 7000 crore; blank bank documents (bank receipts or BRs) stacked in
brokers’ offices; crores of rupees sent by one bank to another, but deposited
in individual accounts.
Suddenly, the shadowy, cabalistic world of money market brokers and
obscenely wealthy operators was under the arc lights. As the scam felled one
big name after another, tarnished by charges of wrongdoing, the air was

thick with names of people one had never heard of, bizarre market practices
and maddeningly complicated deals that foxed even RBI officials.
At its core, the structure of the business was simple. One bank wanting to
sell securities to another would hire a broker who would do the buying and
selling and get a brokerage. But the market was shallow, brokers very few in
number and the expertise was concentrated in the hands of a few individuals.
This created strange relationships and distorted market prices.
It was a world glued together by its own mores. The swank and
technologically fortified treasury of Citibank merged with small and shady
offices of brokers like Hiten Dalal. High-flying executives manning foreign
banks were hand-in-glove with down-to-earth brokers in accommodating
each other. Money snaked in and out of the coffers of public sector
companies, banks, brokers’ personal accounts – a movement about which the
RBI officials were partly clueless and partly tolerant. It was a world of fast
moving money facilitated by fig leaf of securities, false BRs and privileged
information.
Driving the deals were a set of brokers and treasury officials of banks –
Citibank, Bank of America, ANZ Grindlays Bank, Standard Chartered, State
Bank of India, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank and a few others. The brokers
were VB Desai, Bhupen Champaklal Devidas, Hiten Dalal, C Mackertich,
Naresh Aggarwala, Harshad Mehta, DS Purbhoodas and Jayantilal
Khandwala.
The passport to the money markets as well as equity markets is the
membership of any stock exchange. So, all brokers functioning in the money
markets were important in equities too. However, most of them stayed away
from dealing in money markets because it was an arcane world supposedly
offering wafer-thin profits.
Till the mid-1980s, only five players had a mafia-like grip over the money
market. Citibank was the kingpin, masterminding the market’s course. The
broking business was dominated by just four firms, three of which were
loyal to Citibank: DSP, VBD and C Mackertich. The fourth was BCD. As
the market expanded, new players came in, including individual brokers and
banks who saw an opportunity to make money by trading in bonds.

The two oldest firms, who also played godfather to the broking
community, were VBD, owned by the affable Jitu Shroff, and BCD, owned
by Bhupen Dalal. BCD was actually being run by the wily JP Gandhi,
notorious in the market for his many “innovations”. Batlivala & Karani of
Bombay and C Mackertich & Co. of Calcutta were two other big broking
firms, which, along with VBD, have been the launching pad for several
individual careers.
VB Desai, then eighty-two, had spent thirty-five years at Lewis & Jones,
one of the oldest securities firms in the country. He was a rare Maharashtrian
in the Gujarati/Marwari dominated broking business. Jitu Shroff, or Jitubhai,
was his protégé. “He has looked after me since my father died when I was
just sixteen”, he says. The two quit Lewis & Jones to form VBD & Co., in
1978. Four years later, Desai retired and Jitubhai took charge, after a quarter
century of working with his mentor. It now appears that VBD, under Shroff,
has been one of most crooked dealers in the money markets. Citibank used it
as its front in numerous dubious deals and eventually took over a company
controlled by Shroff called Havelock Leasing, renaming it Citicorp
Securities and Investments Ltd.
Appropriately, from the same firm emerged a strange broking creature:
Hiten Dalal, a distant nephew of Bhupen Dalal. Hiten was virtually
unknown, even among the broking community. As the scam exposed his
massive trading volume, close nexus with Stanchart and reckless
transactions that led to the loss of hundreds of crores, even astute market
players like Harshad were stunned.
Hiten was thirty-five years old, portly, and a man of few words but had a
phenomenal memory for figures and transaction details. He worked with Jitu
Shroff from 1978 to 1987, a stint during which he met and married a
colleague, Leena. In 1988, not content with the Rs 10 lakh per year he was
earning, he started his own broking firm. He had been dealing with Stanchart
ever since. He never had a large office, used a Premier 118NE and did not
keep a phone at his suburban home in Andheri. Hiten had no investment
philosophy like Harshad’s, was not a cunning operator like Ajay Kayan of C
Mackertich and did not have the sophistication or ability to chisel arguments
like his uncle Bhupen. But to the treasury officials in banks he was more
important than all these other high-fliers put together.

Hiten was the Mr Fix-it of the securities business, the ultimate problem
solver. “He was virtually running the treasury desks of almost all major
banks”, said a sacked Stanchart employee. It was later established in court
that he was most certainly running the Stanchart treasury desk for a fixed
return to the bank. Hiten had Andhra Bank under his control, was the biggest
securities broker for Citibank and one of the biggest for Grindlays. No
wonder he did business worth Rs 75,000 crore in 1991, which was the
largest, and well ahead of BCD, Harshad and his mentor Jitu Shroff. His
telegraphic code, printed at the top right corner of his letterhead was: “Think
Rich”.
Others to go through the Jitu Shroff training school were
MA Kamat, Samir Dalvi, Asit Mehta and Sunil Jhaveri, son-in-law of MJ
Pherwani, former chief of Unit Trust of India. On 18 th May 1992, three
weeks after news of the scam broke, the partnership VBD was dissolved and
Jitu Shroff became the sole proprietor.
When the scam surfaced, Jitu Shroff was busy spawning dozens of finance
and investment companies. He was moving into industry as well. Jitubhai
explains this, saying, “My guruji advised me to set up a whole lot of
companies.” The guru was Anna Sardeshpande, who had disciples all over
the world. One of them was Bhupen Dalal whose son Milan married
Sardeshpande’s daughter.
Handsome, articulate and sharp, Bhupen was a director in a number of
reputed companies including Bennett Coleman, the publishers of The Times
of India. He played godfather to several struggling brokers including
Hemendra Kothari of DSP in his early days. Bhupen’s business was run
almost entirely by JP Gandhi and Abhay Narottam who held his power of
attorney. The market was surprised when, after the scam was exposed,
Bhupen distanced himself from Abhay Narottam. Bhupen himself appeared
taken aback with the dimensions of the scam. His mind was elsewhere.
Encouraged by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao’s liberalisation policy, he was
busy planning for the next round of growth under the banner of Champaklal
Investment and Financial Consultancy Co., his merchant banking firm.

The other training firm in the business was Batlivala & Karani which was
active in equities and bonds and foreign exchange markets. Its operations
were split between Madhur Murarka, who handled the bonds trading and the
foreign exchange, and Manoj Murarka and their sister Rashmi Agarwal, who
looked after equities. S Ramaswamy, who was arrested in connection with
money moving from Stanchart to the Metropolitan Bank, started in B&K,
moved to Lewis & Jones and then to Harkissondas Laxmidas (a powerful
broking firm which went bust) and finally to PR Subramaniam before
launching his own outfit, Excel & Co. in 1987. Similarly, Anupam Kalidhar
and Ziaur Rahman left B&K to start their own financial services company,
AR Financial.
C Mackertich, though based in Calcutta, emerged as a major player in
equities and bonds. It was run by Ajay Kayan, a low profile but sharp
operator then in his mid-thirties. C Mackertich was at the centre of a network
of broking firms – Stewart & Co., Rahul & Co. and YSN Securities. It had a
joint venture with Stewart & Co. called Stewart and Mackertich Consultancy
Services. These firms dominated the business in close collaboration with
Citibank. C Mackertich, originally bought by Ajay’s father, Gauri Shankar
Kayan, spawned independent brokers like DP Poddar.
Among the big ones, the odd firm out was DSP. It was then a significant
entity in the stock markets but not in the money market. Though its volume
of transactions appeared large, it had few big traders. It struck money market
deals for Kayan who did not have an office in Bombay. The contract notes
that went to banks went from DSP.
Unique among the brokers was Naresh Aggarwala, who left the treasury
chief’s position at Grindlays to start out on his own in New Delhi. He had
neither inherited the broking business nor was he working for a broking firm
like Hiten Dalal. Short, dark and rotund, Aggarwala was as forceful in his
deals as he was in arguments. He loved to bet big and on several occasions
lost heavily mainly to Harshad and BankAm. According to market players,
he and Harshad, both close to Grindlays, have been bitter rivals. Harshad
may have used Grindlays against him while Aggarwala taught his staff to
hate Harshad and his empire, in order to make his firm more competitive.
The rivalry started with their race to dominate the units 4 market and spilled

over to equity scrips like Apollo Tyres in which Harshad was long and
Naresh was short.
None of this was known to the outside world. The bond market was a
closed and secretive enclave for two reasons. First, unlike equity shares,
bonds were not publicly quoted. RBI announced the prices of some
securities but a lot of deals were done on an “off-market” basis. Second, the
bond market was closed to the public. It was an inter-institutional market –
only banks, insurance companies and certain other institutions bought and
sold government securities. In this cabal, “you need the support and
goodwill of at least two of the top brokers, to get in and survive”, said a new
entrant in the business.
Not surprisingly, this handful of leading money market brokers and
trading banks tended to operate in close groups. For instance, C Mackertich
would strike a deal with a Bombay bank and the contract would go from
DSP, owned by Hemendra Kothari, the flamboyant former president of
Bombay Stock Exchange. The two firms worked in tandem with Citibank,
which simultaneously had an equally strong relationship with VBD.
Similarly, Hiten and Aggarwala worked as a team, while Hiten was also
close to Narottam. He transferred hundreds of crores from Stanchart into
Narottam’s account in the Bank of Karad from where some of the money
flowed back to his account in Andhra Bank. Harshad and Aggarwala worked
closely with Grindlays and BankAm, whose treasury operations were headed
by Neeraj Batra. Aggarwala rarely dealt with Citibank and Harshad did so
only in 1991-92.
When the scam was exposed, the leading money market brokers were at
one of the three stages in the game. Some, like Kayan, wanted to remain
brokers, carrying out Citibank’s orders. The second set – players like
Harshad – dreamt of competing and beating banks as principals. The third
set included Kothari and Bhupen who had emerged as high-profile merchant
bankers, with Bhupen even diversifying out of the financial sector. Working
in tandem with them were the bond traders or treasury officials – the guys
with claws stuck into huge amounts of raw money. The big names in money
markets were MK Ashok Kumar of Canbank Financial Services, Atul Sud of
American Express, earlier Neeraj Batra and then Alok Aggarwal of

BankAm, Ramesh Kumar of Citibank and Arvind Lal of Stanchart. Each of
them was unique.
Ashok Kumar was tall, dark, thin and nondescript in looks but by common
consensus, an extraordinary trader. As executive director for Canfina, he
picked up thousands of crores of bonds issued by the public sector
companies, partly to help Canara Bank boost deposits. He was a gutsy trader
in equities as well, with a clear leaning towards Citibank and C Mackertich.
Neeraj Batra short, plump and smooth, with a clear mind as to when and
how to draw the line – a very critical quality in a trader. He had a
compulsive desire to design complicated products, which made him look
akin to Harshad. Less than thirty when he was dealing for BankAm, his
young age and constant swearing earned him the title “brat”.
Atul Sud was a charmer, an egoist and very cautious. He dealt with
everybody, specifically acting as the routing bank for Kayan. Arvind Lal
turned out to be a reckless dealer but was rated very skilful by his own bank
just a few months before the scam was exposed. Vishnu Deuskar was the
gentlest creature in money markets who did not mind his wily juniors taking
credit for deals he may have helped put through. Ramesh Kumar, slippery
and very clever, talked fast and furious in indecipherable money market
jargon. A broker has this to say about him: “Though normally quite
reasonable and courteous, there was one breed of brokers he truly detested:
brokers other than Hemendra Kothari, Ajay Kayan and Utsav Parekh. To
him and other kids in the money markets, brokers were meant to be treated
like loyal dogs.”
This, in short, was the world of money market brokers and treasury
dealers – a world hidden from the public eye. The wider arena where the
public could get a full view of these players was the equity market where
huge profits were virtually guaranteed, especially since 1987, after public
sector mutual funds started sprouting. In the five years since then, using
mutual funds as the dumping ground, stockbrokers emerged as one of the
richest communities in India.
This was not obvious on Dalal Street, where the BSE is located, in the
modern twenty-eight storied Jeejeebhoy Towers. There, money propelled
rapid changes to create spectacular anachronisms in the years leading to the

scam. A vivid symbol of this were the crumbling buildings that stood next to
the stock exchange. Musty, damp and dark, their dilapidated wooden
staircases were lit only by the fluorescent lights of various offices. But their
condition was highly deceptive for these were some of the most expensive
properties in the country. In fact, they were no less expensive than an office
in Manhattan or London.
One such structure, Cama Building, was packed with brokers’ offices
including VBD. Jitu Shroff’s office, nestling within this decrepit edifice, was
a plush oasis in white laminates, chrome and glass. His own cabin had at
least a dozen pictures of various gods and goddesses and several
photographs of his guru, Anna Sardeshpande. There were almost as many
telephones as photographs. These were the lifelines of a broker and in those
days considered to be the first symbols of prosperity. Every successful
broker, who started with a couple of numbers to his office, eventually
boasted of at least a dozen. A telex line to brokers’ offices in Calcutta,
Madras, Ahmedabad or Delhi was the second acquisition. Next in the
prosperity index were fax machines and, of course, computers which were
slowly replacing the chopdis or ledgers wrapped in red cloth.
The ultimate sign of prosperity was the acquisition of an office around
Dalal Street or the comparatively cheaper, though still phenomenally
expensive, Nariman Point. There were reports that Harshad had planned to
convert one of the buildings there, “Maker Chamber V”, into “Mehta
Bhavan”. At the height of the stock boom in 1991, office space there was
going at Rs 12,000 per square foot.
What was least visible was the amazing personal wealth of brokers.
Harshad came in and broke the mould. He was the first stockbroker who
openly flaunted his wealth. He moved his family of four brothers and their
wives from a small flat in the suburbs of Bombay to a 15,000 square foot
apartment with a terrace garden at the Worli Sea Face. Other brokers bought
farmlands and new houses. Some had numbered accounts in secret havens.
A couple of bull operators were also scouting foreign markets from where
they could borrow cheaply.
Foremost among the bulls were Harshad and Pallav Sheth, who
represented the ’90s. Sheth was silky smooth, affable, excellent in public

relations and confident of his skills. Rotund and jovial, he made crores
rigging the shares of the ITC. Sheth’s career was proof that brokers’ fortunes
did not come from brokerage but through their skills in diverting corporate
finance to stock trading and making mutual funds a dumping ground for a
continuous source of funds.
Sheth, who restricted himself to the equity markets, operated through the
firm of Shrenik Jhaveri. Within a year, he had his own card on the BSE,
sponsored the purchase of another on Bangalore Stock Exchange and had
enough money left over to acquire a few more. In the same period he
acquired a black BMW, a grey Mercedes Benz and a Honda.
Between 1987-92, money-market brokers too were undergoing a slow
transformation. The second-generation in most broking houses were more
educated and sophisticated. Some were armed with foreign degrees and had
done stints in merchant banks or industry. They had visions of becoming
full-fledged bond traders, buying and selling on their own account. They
wanted to be in the same position as banks for whom they had been acting as
agents.
An agent was basically a courier. He bought and sold securities on behalf
of the banks and collects thin commissions. Becoming traders in their own
right meant taking risks by betting own money on information and research
on factors such as the outlook of the economy, inflation, likely changes in
interest rates, etc. In the jargon of markets such betting is called “taking
positions”. It signified a basic trans-formation – from an agent to a principal.
This is a perfectly legitimate desire, a natural business progression that
brokers world-wide have undergone. Even in India, it ought to have been
simple to do if only the successive bureaucrats in the ministry of finance and
the RBI governors had opened their minds to the numbing distortions
created by the tight clench of regulation on the financial markets. Their
minds were so closed that they failed to see that the same B&K, Harshad and
Kayan who were supposed to act like post offices for banks in the bond
market, were quite legiti-mately taking positions in the equities market. In
fact, brokers who were both in stock markets and money markets were the
real position takers.

As the markets developed, the new generation of brokers with superior
skills stepped in and taking positions became natural and paying.
Entrepreneurship sprouted in the over-regulated bond market. The biggest
entrepreneur was Harshad. But there were others, like Aggarwala, who was
the treasury chief of Grindlays but had struck out on his own. He emerged as
a daring risk-taker. Position-taking erased the line between banks and
brokers and created a split among them. Harshad’s outfit increasingly began
to resemble a bank, in particular, a trading bank. Harshad had a huge
position in units round the year, perhaps the biggest in the market. The
trading banks and some aggressive finance companies took positions on the
issue of bonds, banking on their ability to market them through a series of
deals. These were Citibank, Grindlays, BankAm, Canfina and Punjab
National Bank. They developed skills to switch, swap, structure and package
a combination of market instruments to meet the needs of the borrowing
banks. Unlike staid and sleepy public sector banks, they avoided blocking up
their funds, moving money around to the highest point of return.
The foreign banks, especially Citibank, were past masters in that game.
AS Thiyagarajan, who moved into Citibank in 1978, was one of the best
traders who had learnt the ropes at Canara Bank and before that at Syndicate
Bank. He turned Citibank into the dominant player in money markets. He
was one of the first to understand that a clever switch of securities and
money, coupled with the ignorance of his treasury counterparts in the public
sector banks, could fetch huge profits. Later, these banks advised by brokers
who were not part of the Citibank’s favoured cartel, became wise too and
started emulating the foreign banks. Citibank frowned upon the idea of
brokers taking positions because it made them competitors in its easy
pickings in the money markets.
In the shadow of these brokers, the non-trading banks increasingly looked
like passive brokers. The roles reversed. Brokers had the expertise,
information and understanding that few banks could match. Like Harshad’s
brother Ashwin said: “We had become the principals while the banks were
acting as brokers. Banks could decide on the brokerage they would pay. We
used to tease them by asking how much bankerage they would charge on the
deals we created for them.”

Brokers had their corporate clients. Bankers who found it impossible to
get that cash ended up broking for the brokers. In two years, the BR would
have stood for Brokers’ Receipts. Fairgrowth was already using something
of that sort – Securities Receipts. The Syndicate Bank, Nariman Point
branch, got Rs 203 crore from portfolio clients and funnelled the entire
amount through a single broker, Kishore Narottamdas Amarchand, who in
turn gave it to Fairgrowth Financial and Fairgrowth Investments. The broker
was taking all decisions on the PMS account and was virtually operating the
scheme.
But there was still a vital difference. Banks had capital. Brokers did not.
Brokers could not go public, could not borrow, and could not even issue
debentures. On the other hand, companies with a much lower net worth
could tap the capital market for funds. Unable to raise money, these brokers
had to find ways and means to fund themselves. This quest for capital in
order to draw the playing field level is crucial to understanding Harshad’s
capers in the securities market. But more about that later.
Brokers could not have traded heavily on their own. The system did not
allow it. So, for years the brokers in money markets have had a dual
relationship with banks. For some deals they were just brokers while for
others, they acted as a client. In the first role, they acted as an agent earning
brokerage. In the second, the banks acted as agents to these broker-clients
and charged a fee for fronting the deals and putting through the cheques.
This was called routing. Sometimes the bank charged a commission
reflecting the full deal in the current account of the broker. In other cases the
routing bank owned up transactions on the bank’s account and after charging
its fee, debited/credited the broker’s account for the difference. Routing
helped the broker give his deals the status of a bank deal. He could then take
a position and compete directly with other banks.
Brokers were of great use to banks as well. The government (rightly)
wanted the public sector banks to compete and earn profits because they
were close to bankruptcy. However, it (wrongly) wanted them to deliver
results immediately with the same rotten infra-structure and skills and with
their hands tied behind their backs. The banks, carrying huge bad loans on
their books, saw treasury as the only way to make quick profits. They turned
to their allies: the brokers. This explains why the chairman of the sick and

bankrupt United Commercial Bank, K Margabanthu, eager to turn the bank
around, had a close nexus with Harshad.
Brokers saw an even bigger role for themselves as the Narasimha Rao
government moved towards a system driven by markets and not by
government diktats . This meant, for instance, that the staid development
financial institutions like IDBI and ICICI who were earlier being fed with
easy money were now out in the market calling in brokers and merchant
banks and seeking presentations on how best to raise money. IDBI, for
instance, had an open-door policy. Anyone was welcome to make a
presentation. If it worked with the officials, he got the mandate.
Even the public sector was no longer a holy cow. Their shares were up for
the grabs. The first lot of public sector undertakings shares were sold off in
December 1991 initially to the government-owned institutions like UTI,
banks and insurance companies. It was only a matter of time before these
shares would be listed and offered to the public. The interest rates on
corporate bonds were freed and coupon rates on government securities
hiked, leading to a great turbulence in the money market. Those were heady
days for the financial community. Risk-taking increased exponentially.
Brokers and bankers sincerely believed that their market, based on trust,
though defective in many ways, was doing fine. Nobody batted an eyelid
while taking exposures of Rs 10 crore or accommodating each other for spot
finance up to even Rs 4-5 crore.
Equity brokers were no less innovative. They had metamorphosed into
investment advisors to their corporate clients and helped them shrewdly
deploy surplus cash to increase the company’s earnings. This was a big
change from the earlier days when brokers would be at the beck and call of
industrialists to either clandestinely dump shares or rig prices.
If the brokers were in the throes of a transformation, so were many of the
institutions where treasury officials realised that by churning their portfolio
of bonds they could step up their earnings. Basically, banks could take
advantage of the multiple rates prevalent in the same market, borrowing low
and investing high.

So, by the beginning of 1991, both in form and substance, the spirit of
Wall Street had arrived. It was possible to trade dangerously, win
handsomely and even have a part of the megabucks spill over into one’s
pocket. It was like transforming oneself overnight into a go-getting
entrepreneur in an area still regimented and controlled by the State. One
example of this phenomenon was Prime Securities, which was ahead of its
time and defined the shape of things to come. It was set up by Ravi Sheth, a
young member of the Sheth family which controls Great Eastern Shipping.
The Sheths, especially the late Vasant Sheth, Ravi’s uncle, had a great
trading instinct. He would trade from ships to stocks sometimes on the basis
of privileged information.
His nephew, Ravi Sheth, thirty-one, driven by mega ambitions in a
business that needed only brains and a few phone lines, launched Prime with
Rs 1.3 crore of asset portfolio obtained from Great Eastern Shipping. To
head it, Ravi lured away Neeraj Batra, the treasury chief of BankAm with
whom walked out his colleagues Ravi Mehrotra, Shiv Kumar and Nitin
Kataria. In June 1992, Batra persuaded N Jaya Kumar of Citibank, an
aggressive merchant banker in his mid-thirties to join Prime at a sign-on
bonus rumoured to be Rs 25 lakh, which was then a very large sum.
Prime Securities was soon the talk of town with its profits and large bonus
pool arrangements that would make its core team rich overnight. In 1990-91,
after a few months of operation, Prime had made Rs 2.23 crore post-tax
profits. In 1991-92, as the money market turned turbulent and the stock
market boomed, Batra, thanks to his close association with Harshad, made a
killing in the stock market and substantial profits in the money markets. At
its peak, Prime was trading more than Rs one crore a day in units alone. At
the end of the year, Prime had logged a stupendous profit of Rs 9 crore. And
then it was time to turn the eyes towards the bonus pool. Prime had in place
a team bonus that sliced out 40% of the income after deducting all expenses.
This bonus was available in a pre-set ratio only after the team crossed a
profit hurdle.
Calculated this way, Batra earned a mind-numbing bonus of
Rs 2.5 crore of which Rs one crore got deducted at source as income tax.
That was more money in a year than most executives earned in a lifetime
those days. Batra’s account at Citibank (ironical, because Batra, teaming up

with Harshad, had broken Citibank’s monopoly in the money markets) used
to have around Rs one crore teasingly lying around waiting for him to decide
where to invest.
These megabuck bonuses drove the market players no doubt. But there
was a lot of reckless over-trading as well where dealers got carried away.
Lata Sriram was one of the few women bond traders in the business. She
was the main trader of DB Finance – a finance company floated by Deutsche
Bank and Brooke Bond. The employees of the bank and the Unilever
companies, of which Brooke Bond was a part, owned 26% of DBF’s capital.
DBF was set up in the hope that the financial sector would be liberalised.
Though a separate legal entity, DBF was completely controlled by
Deutsche Bank and the employees even made joint marketing calls for new
business. In the great turbulence of 1991, Sriram, who was extremely well
connected, found the situation tailor-made for her. Her husband was at
American Express, her father-in-law was in SBI Mutual Fund and her father
was a secretary in the ministry of finance. She herself was a former
employee of Grindlays which incidentally did not think too well of her. One
mutual fund wanted to hire her but was advised by a Grindlays executive not
to.
Sriram was caught up in the whirl of spiralling prices and near certain
information that UTI would either hike its dividend consi-derably or link the
units to net asset value. If UTI did that, the price of units would have jumped
from Rs 15 to Rs 30 – the real net asset value calculated by UTI internally.
Like many other bond dealers, Lata was carried away with visions of earning
record profits. Her forward buying exposure to units mounted steadily until
DBF, which had a Rs one crore capital, had an exposure of Rs 1000 crore to
units, some for July 1992 and the rest for the next year. But the dividend
never rose too much and the unit price was not linked to net asset value.
Lata’s bet was wrong.
DBF admitted to the first commitment to purchase Rs 600 crore units in
July 1992, but refused to accept the second of Rs 400 crore for 1993. Sriram
resigned soon after the scam surfaced and the bank faced a minimum loss of
Rs 20 crore on an equity of just Rs one crore due to her commitments. Both
DBF and Deutsche Bank pretended that this nightmare never happened.

Even when it became imperative to explain the bank’s position to the press,
the German chief executive, HJ Fraezer, maintained silence.
Sriram’s was not an isolated case of over-trading. Arvind Lal, was less
than thirty years old and lived an austere life, was a vegetarian, teetotaller
and a non-smoker, ended up dealing recklessly in thousands of crores
through shady brokers, without proper documents and taking bafflingly large
risks on relatively unknown banks like the Bank of Karad and Metro Bank.
Ironically, Lal was considered one of the brightest persons in Stanchart’s
treasury and was mentioned as the best trader in Stanchart’s MESA region
(Middle East, South Asia). It was later revealed that broker Hiten Dalal was
the man running the division.
However skilful, enterprising or reckless these players – a dealer like
Ashok Kumar, brokers like Harshad or Sheth and trading banks like Citibank
– they all needed a fertile ground in which to plant their investments. That
ground was a financial system created by bureaucrats in the ministry of
finance, by the slothful senior officials in RBI and successive finance
ministers. As passive participants they were no less important than crooked
brokers, reckless traders and greedy bankers.

Chapter 3
Creed of Greed
The scam was not
limited to individuals.
Everybody was in it,
like vultures nibbling
at a rotten corpse.

THE scam was inevitable. What eventually emerged as a gigantic securities
scandal was a collection of small sores that had been festering just under the
skin of a gasping banking system. The sores were created by two decades of
over-regulation on paper, lack of control in practice, a creaking infrastructure
and the misguided policies of RBI that refused to acknowledge the reality of
the market place. That banking system, still in place, was so flawed that
Harshad came up with this telling justification of his wrongdoing: “I am a
part of the system.”
The system was unique. Imagine a business where the government
dictates what price you pay for your raw material (interest paid on deposits),
selling prices (interest earned) and whom to sell – a business that is a 53.5%
disaster. Till the 1992-93 Budget, 38.5% of the deposits went into statutory
liquidity ratio as forced subscription to low-interest bonds issued by the
government and its various agencies. Another 25% went into cash reserve
ratio as cash and other low-interest short-term securities like treasury bills.
You were free to deploy only 36.5% of the cash you collected and that too
went into the “priority sector” and political lending.
Imagine also that though your hands are so tied behind your back, the
money outside the core banking system carries varying costs and returns. For
instance, if you ran a company and had some surplus cash you could finance
buying and selling of shares and make more than, say, 40% per annum. In
this fashion, different segments of the financial sector offered different rates

of return; commercial banking offered one of the lowest. This was ironic
because banks controlled virtually 70% of money flows, with insurance
companies, the corporate sector and mutual funds accounting for the rest.
But though rates of return were high in some pockets at the fringes of the
financial system and lowest at the vast middle, money was not allowed to
flow freely from a low-return area to a high-return one (a movement called
arbitrage) thanks to rigid lending parameters and controlled interest rates.
But successive finance ministers and RBI governors (including Manmohan
Singh, who has served in both the capacities) failed to acknowledge a simple
fact: the flow of money is uncontrollable. If brokers are choked off from
bank credit when the stock markets offer 40% interest per annum, whereas
government securities offer 12.5% and corporate lending 21%, money will
find a way towards the brokers’ accounts. This would be illegal, but
commer-cially understandable. Academics even have a name for it:
regulatory arbitrage.
The arbitrage was facilitated by the lack of a proper market for securities
worth Rs 200,000 crore! Unlike the stock exchanges, where equity is openly
traded at publicly quoted prices, there was no proper money market – where
public sector bonds, debentures and Gilts could be quoted and traded openly.
This also applied to new mutual fund units like Cantriple on which
speculation was intense. RBI announced purchase and sale quotes only for
some central loans and had never been a net buyer of securities in the open
market. This one-way street ensured that prices were never market oriented.
This gave rise to widespread manipulation in bond trading. Banks and
brokers could quote artificial rates and cream off huge profits, usually at the
expense of smaller nationalised banks. RBI’s parti-cipation in the money
markets could have been a corrective mechanism. Unfortunately, its role,
unlike several leading central banks, ended with the issue of central loans.
RBI tried to get Discount and Finance House of India to broker security
deals and opened a security window on 1 st April 1992, with much fanfare.
But DFHI was an unwitting broker to Harshad’s massive buying of 11.5%
government loan and the window dwindled to a showpiece in less than a
month.

In money markets, the first signs of inevitable rot appeared sometime in
the mid-1980s. After more than a decade of so-called social banking, banks
found themselves groaning under a load of investments they were forced to
make to maintain the SLR. The investments were in low-interest bearing
loans issued by central and state governments that financed the government’s
ever-increasing appetite for cash.
Banks intended to hold these low-interest government bonds till maturity.
But each time a new set of loans came with a slightly higher interest rate
(called coupon rate) the market price of older securities fell. Banks began to
book losses, which eroded their profitability. So, in 1985, to cover up one
foolish idea (of forcing the banks to buy low-interest securities) the
government came up with another. Banks were told to show their investment
at cost in their books.
Banks could show the value of a bond in its books at, say, Rs 100 when
the market value was perhaps Rs 95. This signalled two things. First, it
meant an official sanction to push dirt (a loss of Rs 5) under the carpet.
Second, it also signified that RBI was unconcerned about bank’s books
reflecting the reality of the market. In this case, those investments were no
longer worth Rs 100 in the market place. The idea was to choose convenient
solutions. These two factors were later applied with monotonous regularity
in every area. RBI authorised it: hide your dirt and ignore the market, in part,
because there is no proper market. Among the many factors responsible for
the scam, these two were foremost.
The banks got around the problem of falling value of investments in an
ingenious way. They started switching their securities. They would sell one
for Rs 100, which had a market value of, say, Rs 90. Then they would pay
Rs 95 to buy a security worth Rs 85. The banks would not lose anything and
in the bargain their portfolio was priced closer to the market. The deals were
put through by brokers, some-times through their books. This is one of the
first signs of brokers being used as tools by institutions to “adjust” losses – a
strategy that explains lot of bizarre deals and lies at the heart of the scam.
Thanks to RBI’s market-blind rules, institutions were using brokers –
often clandestinely – as their extended arms. For instance, RBI prohibited
brokers for call money transactions – inter-bank money transactions done on

a minute-to-minute basis. Brokers were routinely called in for help. In some
cases, bank officials used to sit in brokers’ offices to do the deals. Since
brokers got no brokerage for this, the institutions had to find other ways to
compensate. All institutions were “guilty” of it. Even RBI subsidiaries used
brokers extensively for call money operations.
When Canbank Mutual Fund started, its first set of operations was
executed in the office of Growmore. A large amount of ready forward deals
of Canbank Financial Services were nursed in Growmore’s books for over a
year, at the rate of Rs 109. Citibank had a range of products, which it offered
its brokers. Within certain parameters, it offered brokers an open mandate to
take positions in partnership with Citibank. Of course, most of the time Ajay
Kayan alone had the privilege. ANZ Grindlays Bank on the other hand was
close to the Mehtas. “We love the bank. They believed in relationship-based
banking, not deal-based banking, unlike BankAm (Bank of America) or
Citibank. We were one of the major brokers and a major client as well”, said
Ashwin Mehta.
Brokers were also acting as agents for smart banks, often dumping
securities on to the books of weaker banks. In the absence of a regular
market, trading in government securities was controlled by Citibank, whose
“skills” and methods stand out like a sore thumb. The market norm was: loot
a weak party when you find one. This is best exemplified by the story of
SBI.
A few months after DN Ghosh stepped into the chairman’s office at SBI,
he wanted to make the treasury operations an important source of revenue.
“This is a trend all over the world. We too must energise our treasury
department”, Ghosh told his colleagues. He inaugurated a golden era for
SBI’s treasury operations. Brokers were asked to make presentations to the
bank, explaining how the market worked and how certain foreign banks
could manipulate quotes through their favourite brokers to create win-win
situations for themselves.
Ghosh’s principal secretary was CL Khemani, who along with GG Vaidya,
(later became the chairman), started churning the bank’s portfolio to
maximise return. This was a big leap. SBI’s treasury had been a place for
executives in semi-retirement. A few years before Khemani took charge, it

was headed by a heart patient; the bank top management posted him there
because it was the least onerous job!
As soon as Ghosh took over he conducted a securities audit. He and
Vaidya discovered to their horror that SBI had been looted systematically by
a couple of foreign banks and its set of loyal brokers. Their strategy was
simple: sell securities with longer maturity to SBI (say, 7.5% coupon rate of
1997 maturity) and buy securities with shorter maturity (say, 6.75% of
1992). Why would SBI buy them? Because they fetched it higher (7.5%)
current yield than the bonds it sold (6.75%). The deal, brokers argued,
helped SBI step up the yield of its portfolio.
The yield step-up trick, of course, rested on ignoring a crucial point:
effective yield. The purchasing bank would go for the maximum interestbearing instrument available in the government securities market. Assume
that the maximum rate going is 11.5%. That, then, would be the benchmark
for all trades. Through yield step-up, a bank ought to be able to earn 11.5%,
not just 7.5%. It could do this by buying the same 7.5% bond but at a lower
price so that its effective earning is 11.5%. In a free market, the traders,
guided by effective yield, would automatically price the older, lower
interest-bearing bonds, to reflect the maximum yield available. But what if
there was no market price to reflect this?
The best way to fix the price would be to use bond tables and arrive at
what traders call “yield-to-maturity” – YTM. Bond tables provide readymade information on what ought to be the price of different interest-bearing
bonds for each year up to maturity, at particular yields. Unfortunately, while
YTM was well known to dealers in foreign banks, it was an alien concept in
public sector banks. In 1987, a broker was shocked to find Vaidya
calculating year-by-year bond values manually. He suggested to him that he
use bond tables instead and thus SBI was inducted into modern day-trading.
A quick look at bond tables would show that in 1986, when the current
coupon rate was 11.5%, a 6.75% 1992 bond would be priced at Rs 83.50 to
give 10.5% yield. If the bank were to exchange this for a 7.5% bond of 1997
maturity, it would similarly look up the bond table and find that the price is
just Rs 79.25. The exchange, therefore, left it richer by 0.75% on current
yield but poorer by Rs 4.25 on price.

The public sector banks did not know of this simple technique. So, the
brokers would first sell the yield-step-up idea (I’ll give you securities that
give 0.75% more as interest). Then as a “bonus” they would price the 7.5%
bonds at a slight discount from face value, say at Rs 98, and buy out the
6.75% bonds at Rs 100. The selling bank was effectively giving a discount
of just Rs 2 when the actual difference was Rs 4.25. In this manner, public
sector banks have been cheated out of tens of crores by one aggressive US
bank and its loyal brokers, which kept a part of the loot in the form of higher
brokerage.
When Ghosh discovered these transactions, known among the broking
community as “rape deals”, he thundered, “I am going to close down this
bank in India”, referring to the US bank that had plundered SBI’s portfolio.
SBI became vengeful, mean and aggressive, using its gigantic size to the
hilt. It was hoarding the largest stock of bonds, lying largely inactive. Then
in 1985 Indian Banks’ Association announced a ceiling of 10% on call
money lending. It was a big bonanza for SBI, the biggest lender. Faced with
an acute shortage of funds to meet statutory obligations, banks queued up at
SBI for call money. SBI’s cash horde was so huge that it could control
liquidity in the market and hence the call rates. “Even banks’ chairmen had
to beg and plead with SBI for money”, brokers recounted. The worst
affected were UCO bank, Central Bank, Vijaya Bank and Canara bank.
SBI decided to use its liquidity to flush out its bond portfolio. On paper it
gave out funds on call at 10% but in practice at an effective rate of 60-70%.
The trick was to force banks to buy a packet of securities at an artificially
high price – after loading the cut-throat call money rate. It helped SBI get rid
of all its unattractive low-priced securities. This did not make it popular in
the industry – other banks resented being made collectively responsible for
the lapses of SBI’s own treasury officials. But it had little effect.
Brokers and other bankers found SBI’s “take it or leave it” attitude
particularly humiliating. Vaidya’s favourite dismissive line “Ley lo, nahi to
khao piyo aur mast raho” (Take the offer, or eat, drink and be happy) rang in
the ears of many bankers. MN Goiporia, as chairman of Central Bank of
India, had suffered at Vaidya’s hands. As soon as Goiporia came to SBI,
Vaidya was transferred. SBI’s dominance continued from 1987 to 1989, until
RBI scrapped the mindless 10% ceiling on call rate. The looting of SBI

treasury and its revenge signify one thing: money markets were not markets
in the Western or American sense of the term. They were akin to an Indian
jungle.
By 1986, another festering sore erupted which the government found
impossible to contain; lack of resources for capital-intensive public sector
undertakings like National Thermal Power Corporation. Banks had no
money left after funding the government at a low cost and writing off bad
loans made under political pressure. So, the brilliant mandarins in the
ministry of finance devised another makeshift arrangement. (The finance
secretary then was S Venkitaramanan who later became the RBI governor.)
PSUs were asked to borrow directly from the market by issuing 9% tax-free
bonds and 13% bonds. Later, some were allowed to issue 17% bonds as
well. By the end of 1991, PSUs had issued bonds worth over Rs 20,000
crore. This was a time bomb, quietly ticking away.
Nobody knew who would buy these bonds, how they would be serviced,
how they would be bought and sold in the secondary market and what would
happen if interest rates turned turbulent. But banks needed deposits and
PSUs needed money. So they formed an alliance – another in a series that
market players struck – to cut off each other’s handcuffs put on them by
RBI. The banks picked up the bonds on condition that the PSUs would also
make additional deposits with them. (Citibank, Canara Bank and Canfina
were the most active in such deals which always resulted in large spreads for
them.) But the problem remained. How would a bank service the bonds in its
portfolio if the corresponding deposits suddenly disappeared?
The following year, another “innovation” entered the scene: the portfolio
management scheme. This was another child produced by the regime of
controls and regulation. Banks were allowed to accept deposits (free from
SLR and CRR obligations) under PMS from any institution sitting on
surplus cash. But the rules were so stringent that instead of giving more
freedom to both the parties it became another handcuff. PMS was supposed
to be provided at clients’ risk; the money had to be kept for one year,
transactions were supposed to be at market rates; and nobody could
guarantee a fixed return.

These rules were restrictive and impractical, bordering on nonsensical.
The boards of PSUs work under the glare of respective ministries and
government auditors, including parliamentary com-mittees. They could
never bring themselves to give out money without being assured of definite
returns clearly documented. But the rules stipulated that no guaranteed
return could be paid. So, here too the players forged alliances to break the
handcuffs.
It was too tempting not to. Stripped of the restrictions, PMS was a
potential gold mine. Money was gradually accumulating in ever-larger pools
outside the banking system. In 1987, banks and insurance companies were
allowed to float mutual funds and the early success of CanMutual provided
the impetus to others. Soon they would be raising thousands of crores of
investible cash. Another growing money pool were the treasuries of the
public sector. Several PSUs were financing imports through borrowings in
dollars in exchange for which they were sitting on rupee surpluses. Thanks
to the depreciating rupee, their effective cost of dollar borrowings was as
high as 25% in 1987. The Indian Oil Corporation had an exposure of Rs
4000 crore with potential loss of Rs 600 crore in interest cost in one year.
This is when smart brokers, foreign banks and Canara Bank stepped in and
showed the means to reduce the cost of funds through investments in taxfree bonds and units. SBI, with whom the bulk of the money was deposited,
did not similarly respond and PSUs started dealing with foreign banks in a
bigger way. Also, the ever-increasing budget deficit forced PSUs to float
their own bonds and borrow directly from the institutions which had the
money to subscribe. NTPC and the Indian Railways Finance Corporation
emerged as big bond issuers, often sitting on hundreds of crores in shortterm cash. For instance, IRFC issued 9% tax-free bonds worth Rs 800 crore
in July 1991 and again Rs 700 crore in November the same year. PSUs
needed to put this money somewhere. Enter the banks.
The banks were starved of profitable avenues to make money. There was a
stage when the government was impounding 63.5% of deposits. They
desperately needed all the money it could get from the cash surplus
companies. The conduit: PMS, announced by RBI in 1987. Since PMS
money was supposed to be held merely in a fiduciary capacity, it did not
form a part of the deposits garnered by the bank. It was, therefore, free from
the draconian reserve requirements (CRR and SLR) imposed on bank

deposits that sapped profitability. PMS money could be used any way and
fully. Citibank and a few Indian banks like the Syndicate Bank and Vijaya
Bank soon realised that by subverting all important PMS rules including the
ban on foreign banks from availing of the PMS, they could make a great deal
of easy money. The idea was simple: collect money from the public sector
companies with a promise to deliver a fixed return and deploy it in the equity
and money markets where the returns were much higher.
Smart bankers invented ways and means to bypass RBI regulations that
chained PMS. Citibank, being a foreign bank, was not allowed to run
portfolios of PSUs. It got around the rule by using Vijaya Bank as a front. It
cleverly played on terms like “assured return”, “benchmark return” and
“indicative return” to skirt the rule that forbade fixed or guaranteed return. It
approached cash-surplus PSUs, guaranteed (illegally) a fixed and low rate of
return and used their money to trade in shares and bonds – both of which
generated huge margins. Surplus PSU money parked with the nationalised
banks was weaned away to foreign banks. It was a win-win situation for
banks. On paper, the client was taking the entire risk. In practice, the banks
were reaping all the rewards.
PMS was such a lucrative honey pot in the over-regulated banking system
that desperate brokers and bankers struck deals with PSUs to ensure that the
money was routed through them. This obviously involved greasing palms. It
was at this stage that political influence came into play. To get a PSU to park
its money with banks, a standard 2% kickback was paid – often through
brokers. Brokers have even bypassed companies and struck deals with parent
ministries. Foreign banks employed close relatives of various government
officials who could influence the investment decisions of the PSUs. When
the business became rampant in the 1990s, even nationalised banks paid
kickbacks to get PMS money. How have the banks accounted for this? Partly
by granting advances to firms controlled by politicians and their backers and
then writing off that money as bad loans over a period of time.
RBI rules on PMS were never observed. Banks were freely accepting
money for less than one year and were guaranteeing fixed returns – above
the normal interest rate on one-year bank deposits. The minimum PMS
duration of one year was circumvented by various means. Very few PSUs
had surplus cash to park for one-year periods. They normally used the PMS

of banks to do ready forward deals in fixed-income securities. The books of
the PSUs showed them as deposits. The banks showed them as ready
forward transactions. The deal was simple: use brokers to buy units and
bonds and liquidate them three months later – all on the client’s account. It
was a neat trick but a clear violation of RBI guidelines. The source was
deposits made by the public sector units and so banks were obliged to put
63.5% of that money in statutory reserves. But they brazenly flouted that by
showing those PSU deposits as short-term funds used for buying securities
for selling them back and returning the money to the PSUs. These
transactions were rolled over in an unending chain.
This was done with the full knowledge of RBI. Throughout 1987-90, RBI
noticed what was happening and issued repeated warnings to the banks. But
such was the market players’ contempt for RBI that these warnings were
completely ignored. Some banks had actually cloaked their violation in
legalese. They secured legal opinion that while PMS – as dictated by RBI –
would have to follow the four cardinal rules (money for one year, no
guaranteed return, investments dictated by clients and transactions at market
rates) the same transactions could be structured as short-term cash
management deals that need not follow RBI rules. In these cases, deals were
done on a transaction-to-transaction basis, investors did not specify what to
buy and the risk was on clients.
To a great extent the distinctions between PMS deals and short- term deals
were semantic in nature. RBI had never specifically allowed anything
outside the PMS. But it never disallowed it either. Banks, however, went to
great lengths to create sophisticated distinctions. The cash management
schemes were supposed to generate fees and the banks satisfied themselves
with legal opinion that since there was no basket of securities or long-term
arrangement, they did not fall under the PMS. In 1990, around Rs 5000 crore
of money market assets were being churned in this fashion as per the
Stanchart’s estimate.
Canfina and Stanchart conferred an even greater cloak of legitimacy by
giving them fancy names like Corporate Cash Deployment Services (as in
Stanchart) and Financial and Investment Advisory Services (as in Canfina).
Surprisingly, Citibank, which slung the biggest gun from its shoulders in the
fight to procure funds, never bothered to cloak its scheme, preferring to

plainly call it PMS. After the scam was exposed, Citibank claimed that it had
done nothing wrong whereas Grindlays admitted to the JPC that it had
violated each and every guideline.
The foreign banks and Canfina were found to be the most active in PMS
thanks to their willingness to create a win-win situation for all. For instance,
when the PFC needed money it issued Rs 300 crore of 17% bonds to
Citibank and Canfina who subscribed to the bonds only because PFC
promised to re-invest the money in their PMS. PFC put the money in
Citibank’s portfolio at just 14.25% return in the middle of a booming market
and when even the best corporate debentures carried a 16% return.
The Madras office of SBI Capital Markets collected money under PMS
and turned it over to brokers mainly Harshad Mehta but also to Citibank and
Kotak Mahindra Finance. When the money came back – with profits – SBI
Caps returned the principal and the fixed return to the client and kept the
rest. But SBI Caps was not the biggest player in the PMS game. Citibank
and Stanchart headed the list. Strangely, though it was crystal clear that these
two banks have bilked customer accounts just like SBI Caps has, RBI made
no effort to investigate them.
In 1987 came the biggest incentive for corruption in the equity markets:
the mutual funds. Till then there was just one, the UTI headed by the eternal
optimist, MJ Pherwani, the original Big Bull. UTI, with a corpus of Rs
20,000 crore was the big dad of the market. If it bought, the market went up.
If it sold, a minor crash followed. Then, in 1987, the government-owned
banks and insurance companies were allowed to set up mutual funds, a
decision that was piloted by S Venkitaramanan when he was the finance
secretary.
One after another came the mutual fund schemes of Canara Bank, SBI and
those of the insurance companies. CanMutual emerged as the most
aggressive, cooking up subscription figures by getting other institutions to
subscribe and preferring to deal with a handful of brokers. In the case of the
much-vaunted Boinanza of Bank of India, Harshad Mehta contributed Rs 20
crore of the Rs 49 crore corpus. In return, the fund was supposed to buy the
shares Harshad dictated. Other top equity brokers too cultivated close
relationships with mutual funds, using them as their own. This arrangement

was particularly useful in rigging up prices or selling short. RBI was
supposed to sanction and regulate mutual funds, as they were bank
subsidiaries. It did nothing of the sort.
As if in tandem, the infrastructure of public sector institutions was in
tatters. For instance, often money piled up with institutions but they had
neither the means nor the skills to move that cash around. The treasury
manager of an insurance company had hundreds of crores at his disposal to
place on the call market but he did not even have a direct phone connection,
leave alone a hotline to other brokers and banks. The latter, on the other
hand, were backed by sophisticated telecom and transaction processing
facilities. Often banks had no pre-set exposure limits against each broker or
transactions. Even some foreign banks threw to the winds the systems they
used overseas. They ignored proper credit-risk assessment before they
accepted a BR or dealt with a broker.
The infrastructure of money markets and stock markets was creaking too.
The Public Debt Office was supposed to record the transaction details of
various government securities for each bank on the basis of subsidiary
general ledger notes. The PDO did the recording manually in ancient
ledgers, often falling behind by more than ten days. The SGLs entered in the
ledgers often carried no reference to transactions. For instance, if three SGLs
of the Bank of America reached PDO on the same day and two bounced
because of insufficient balance, it would be impossible to say which of the
three had bounced. And most amazingly, in a system where the daily trade
ran into hundreds of transactions, the banks were informed of the bounced
SGLs by post.
Brokers and bankers quickly learnt to take advantage of PDO’s
sloppiness. They created delays and deliberately had the SGLs bounced to
show an artificially higher balance and then traded on that. Bounced SGL
intimation notes were made to disappear and their loss blamed on postal
delays. SGL bouncing was a genuine problem too. Often, banks issued SGLs
without realising that they had no balance in the PDO to support the sale. To
counter this came another instrument: BRs. A selling bank would issue a BR
instead of securities. The technique was especially useful in the case of
buyback deals (ready forward) for short periods where there was no need to
exchange physical securities. But it gave further room for manipulation.

Banks and other financial institutions would issue BRs without holding
securities, or issue BRs against BRs. This way, the original BR of a weak
bank was quickly exchanged for that of a more “respectable” bank. This
technique was used by foreign banks to cover their tracks. They used Andhra
Bank, Syndicate Bank, State Bank of Saurashtra and Canara Bank. Some
banks like Metropolitan Co-operative Bank also got into the name-lending
business, issuing BRs for free. Citibank even had the gall to issue bounced
SGLs, which is akin to issuing a bounced and cancelled cheque. To meet his
inexhaustible appetite for cash, Harshad pressed ahead with the ultimate
subversion: securing straight credit from the NHB against no transactions or
securities and BRs.
Public sector companies, which raised money through bonds, took almost
a year to allot them, since printing the bonds was not allowed until a
mortgage was created. So, letters of allotment were traded as security. One
PSU had not printed bond certificates even four years after raising money.
There was no method of credit rating the bond and prices depended on the
traders’ perception of the issuer. This could be highly biased. Even when
bond certificates were available, trading volumes were so large that it was
difficult to effect deliveries. Once a broker needed 240 signatures to transfer
680,000 bonds. Obviously bankers were reluctant to take deliveries and
instead relied on their makeshift stock depository certificate – the BRs. The
same story occurred in the equity markets. Share certificates belonging to
SBI Caps were piled up in the corridors of SBI.
The quality of regulation failed to keep pace with the volumes –most
glaringly in stock markets. There were no penalties and little disclosures of
transactions. The Securities and Exchange Board of India, though
empowered through an ordinance to be the whistle blower, was fighting a
pitched battle with brokers. SEBI wanted brokers to register with it; brokers
were reluctant and closed down the markets in protest.
Under chairman GV Ramakrishna, SEBI was at least trying its best to
enforce some rules for the jungle. But RBI, which never lent its ear to the
babble in the marketplace, was mostly clueless as to the growth of the
money market and the extent of malpractices in PMS, the can of worms
called mutual funds, the emergence of new players and the need for an open
system and close regulation. This is painfully clear from the reports

produced by the Janakiraman Committee, which naively wonders why the
banks were booking artificially high rates and why brokers were taking large
losses in their books. On the rare occasions when RBI officials stumbled
upon shady deals, their bosses looked the other way.
This, then, was the Indian financial sector: lack of a proper money market,
poor infrastructure and systems, PMS and mutual funds as a dumping
ground and poor supervision. Attracted by this opportunity, brokers and
bankers had all converged in the late 1990s in a grand alliance like vultures
on a corpse. Thanks to thin disclosures, their deals were closed to the public
view, stock prices were shooting up and down and the world of money rested
precariously on one word: accommodation.
The banks needed brokers’ help to hide losses. In return, the brokers
needed bank money and their treasury deals to make abnormal profits. The
mutual funds needed brokers and banks for subscription to their schemes
while the brokers needed mutual funds to dump shares at high prices and
create liquidity for their next capers. The cash-starved public sector needed
banks to subscribe to their bonds in exchange for putting the same money
back into the banks as portfolio schemes. Everybody was willing to
accommodate the other, hindered only by individual jealousies and rivalries.
The password to this world of accommodation was “trust”. Deals were put
through first and the paperwork was done later. Sometimes even that was
unnecessary. Call money transactions took place overnight, via the telephone
and call receipts were sent leisurely three to four days later. In case of
buyback deals, brokers liased with banks and acted as couriers in buying and
selling the securities and routed some of the cash through their own
accounts. Stanchart accepted photocopies of bond certificates as delivery.
The whole system rested on trust. That trust was misused.
Indeed, so trusting were the banks and brokers of each other that banks
were fronting for broker-deals through what was known as “routing”. They
were funding brokers and putting through their transactions by lending their
name. This was necessary because several banks still refused to trade
directly with brokers as counter-parties. So a fig leaf was needed – a
fictional counterparties bank. In came the idea of “routing banks”.

Several banks actively wooed brokers for their business, and brokers used
to bargain with banks about the spread they would offer for the routing. This
explains why Grindlays promptly credited more than Rs 500 crore received
from NHB into Mehta’s account even without a covering note to do so. In a
similar deal, SBI credited Rs 90 crore to his account, allowing Mehta to
withdraw it and square up its Rs 622 crore outstanding with SBI. Grindlays
and SBI regularly routed money into Mehta’s account even on oral
instructions. American Express did it for Ajay Kayan and Andhra Bank for
Hiten Dalal. Banks, very simply, were too keen on accommodating brokers.
This was manifested in many other ways – most importantly in the way
brokers were using bank money to do their own deals. And Harshad was not
alone. Banks would buy securities from the broker with the understanding
that the broker would take them back after a few months. The deal was
another way of lending money to the broker for a certain period. But it
violated RBI directive to banks against advancing money to brokers. Also,
the broker got access to bank funds without having to comply with margin
money requirements. The practice was widespread.
The second scheme was direct financing of brokers through discounting
accommodation bills and purchase of shares on ready forward terms. United
Commercial Bank discounted bills worth Rs 50.40 crore for Harshad Mehta,
covering share sales by Jyoti Mehta. This was clean credit. On maturity,
UCO Bank itself provided funds to retire the bills by buying shares from
Mehta for Rs 49.50 crore.
Thirdly, banks placed money on call with other banks, but in the books of
receiving banks there was no record of any call money accepted. The money
was credited to individual brokers’ account. NHB lent Rs 40 crore at call to
UCO Bank on 6 th April 1992, which went to Mehta’s account. On 2 nd April
1992, it lent Rs 17 crore at call to SBI, which again was credited to Mehta’s
account.
Overseeing all this sophisticated networking, accommodation and routing
and bank-broker alliance was a row of deputy governors and the governor of
the central bank with their eyes and ears firmly shut and with an archaic set
of regulations on hand. As the 1990s rolled in, the financial sector was ripe

for a disaster. The faint push needed to bring this decrepit structure crashing
down, however, came from a most unexpected quarter.
Since the regime of secrecy and controls had corroded the guts of the
system, most policy makers – including those who were respon-sible for
such secrecy and controls – decided that “liberalisation” was the right
medicine. The ministry of finance sought to administer precisely that. But
such moves were horribly timed. In July 1991, the finance ministry decided
to liberalise the interest rate on corporate debentures and bonds.
It is still not clear if the government understood the impact of this
decision. It meant that companies could now issue debentures at 16%, 17%
or even higher. Naturally, the older bonds of 13% would be less attractive
and start losing value. In concrete terms, the stock of Rs 20,000 crore of
PSU bonds would lose value by 20% on an average. Covering up this loss
was one of the main causes of the scam.
Manmohan Singh as finance minister later set up a committee to
recommend widespread changes in the financial sector, intending to take the
policy of liberalisation further. These signals made the market go haywire.
Bond values continued to fall. By the end of 1991, 13% bonds had fallen by
35% and 9% bonds by 20%. The total notional loss to the bondholders was
more than Rs 6000 crore though by not selling the bonds they could avoid
booking the loss. RBI, after all, did not want investments marked to the
current market value.
Among the large holders of these bonds were merchant banking
subsidiaries of public sector banks like Canfina and foreign banks like
Citibank, BankAm, Stanchart and Grindlays either in their own name or in
clients’ account. Even after the interest rate was freed, Canfina picked up a
9% IRFC bond issue of Rs 800 crore in July and another tranche of Rs 700
crore in November. Foreign banks, Canfina, SBI Caps and some brokers
were holding close to Rs 7000 crore of these bonds. They hadn’t bought
them for investments. They were trading in them. BankAm and Citibank
even had a policy to mark them to market. So, logically, they ought to be
reflecting losses close to Rs 1500 crore in their books.

In the third week of September 1991 came further liberalisation. Effective
from 3 rd October, the interest rate (or coupon rate) on government securities
(Gilts) was hiked from 11.5% to 12% leading to a fall of about 10% in the
value of older Gilts. This meant further loss of hundreds of crores. Within
six months, on 17 th March 1992, the government hiked up the interest rate
again on government bonds to make it 12.5%. More losses.
This is where the strong nexus between banks and institutions reached a
point of climax. They helped each other out in three ways. One was dumping
the losses in the PMS account from the bank’s own account. PMS was, after
all, clients’ money held by the banks in a fiduciary capacity and the bank
was not obliged to turn over the profits made in excess of the “guaranteed”
return. The second was asking brokers to fund the bond losses for which the
broker looted someone else in the system, perhaps Stanchart. The third
source of money was equity markets where prices were rocketing.
In simpler deals, banks and institutions got brokers like Hiten Dalal to
take the bonds at artificially high prices and thereby avoided booking losses.
Here is an example of this sort of transaction. On 6 February 1992, Canfina
sold six lots of PSU bonds and other debentures to Citibank for Rs 82.85
crore through Hiten Dalal. But Canfina got just Rs 59.93 crore and that too,
not from Citibank but American Express at the behest of C Mackertich, a
broker close to Citibank. The balance (Rs 22.92 crore) came from Hiten
Dalal.
This example highlights the operation of a routing bank (Amex for C
Mackertich) and the close nexus between Citibank and C Mackertich
whereby their position as the counterparty to a deal was interchange-able.
But most important, this was a clear example of a large institution like
Canfina recovering its bond losses from a broker. How does a broker fund an
institution’s losses? There were two ways. First, he gets somebody in the
system, perhaps Stanchart, to pay him through a false BR. Second, the
institutions give away compensatory profits from the PMS clients’ accounts
to the brokers.
One of the best examples of compensatory adjustments at the expense of
portfolio clients is that between Citibank and its virtual house-brokers, C

Mackertich and Stewart & Company. Citibank had used money obtained on
behalf of its “fiduciary” clients under PMS to buy mutual fund units, GIC
Rise I and GIC Rise II, and sold them at below-market rates to its favourite
brokers, Ajay Kayan and Utsav Parekh who run C Mackertich and Stewart
& Co. The brokers resold them at a price that yielded Rs 89 crore in profits
at the expense of Citibank’s PMS clients. This and other deals like these in
mutual fund instruments were possible because the equity market was
booming and units like GIC Rise or Cantriple were not yet quoted.
The system allowed it. The smart and the crooked ganged up to bilk the
weak and ignorant who remained so because they had no incentive to be
otherwise. RBI, watchdog of the banking system, merely watched. Actually,
it did not do even that. It simply did not know how rotten the corpse was.
The stock markets were worse. They were supposed to be more organised
than the money market though no less opaque and, therefore, totally outside
the vision of any regulatory watchdog.
As the turbulence of the money market and equity market converged in
1991-92, it hit the decrepit system like a gale, tearing it to shreds. Suddenly,
profiles of the market players, their illegal cosy deals the bank-broker nexus
were all out in the open. Since little of this was known, everybody reacted
with shocked disbelief. Brokers themselves were stunned. Even while the
guns were being pointed at individuals, there should have been a close relook at how completely rotten the system was. Unfortunately, that did not
happen.
The scam was not limited to individuals. But the public imagination was
transfixed at one or two banks and, more importantly, at one individual as
the villain of the piece. His life and deals make for a fascinating story. The
name: Harshad Mehta.

Chapter 4
A Greenhorn
He stepped in to
watch how the world,
of the share market
spun on its invisible
axis. That afternoon a
new chapter began in
the life of Harshad
Mehta. This was an
unfamiliar world, a
world that would be
his kingdom 10 years
later.

THE year was 1971 and the place Raipur, a semi-industrial town in
Madhya Pradesh, located along the main trunk route that connects Bombay
to Calcutta. There, in a small private school, a loud, brash 16-year-old boy
was making life miserable for his fellow-students and teachers. A Gujarati
by birth, he was particularly weak in Hindi. Ms Ghosh, the Hindi teacher,
found it difficult to deal with his pranks, get him to do his homework and
attend classes. One morning, unable to bear it any longer, she complained to
the principal. The principal called the boy. “Ask your father to see me”, he
said.
That scared the boy to death because his father was a stern man. Instead of
heading back home, he went to a movie. He then roped in an elderly-looking
man called Mr Sahu and produced him before the principal. “My father is
not in town. So I have brought this gentleman. He is my uncle.” Mr Sahu
listened carefully to the principal’s complaints and promised to take care of
the unruly boy.

It was a neat little trick. Too neat for a 16-year-old prankster to remain
discreet about. Soon he was bragging to the class that he has managed to
fool Ms Ghosh and the principal. That was a terrible mistake. One of his foes
squealed.
The principal was livid and promptly rusticated him. His father, equally
angry, put him to work in the family shop. The boy had to open the shop at 8
a.m. every morning. He got cut off from his friends and his favourite game,
cricket.
Of all the fascinating stories about Harshad Shantilal Mehta, this is the
most telling. Twenty years later, the story would repeat itself in a gigantic,
much more complex and agonising fashion. Like he tried to substitute his
father, he would try to substitute hundreds of crores of rupees he had taken
out of State Bank of India. Like he unnecessarily bragged about his trick to
his classmates, Harshad would show off his house, Toyota Lexus and Rs 26crore tax return. Just as his classmate tattled, one of his rivals at the Bombay
Stock Exchange would engineer an income tax raid on him. And just as he
was held captive in his father’s shop, Harshad would have to spend months
and months in prison, roughed up and humiliated like a common criminal.
The two events separated by two decades mark the beginning and the end
of a phenomenon called Harshad Mehta, though like a battered penny stock
he tried to bounce back in 1998. Brash and ingenuous, Harshad, the oldest of
four brothers, would emerge from being an anonymous wastrel to India’s
best known financial “criminal”, the centre of immense national curiosity.
He did not go back to the school at Raipur, passing the school leaving
examination privately. In 1973, he returned to Bombay (where he had spent
the first nine years of his life) in the eastern suburbs of Ghatkopar with his
maternal uncle. Ill health had forced Harshad’s father, Shantilal Mehta, to
abandon his business of selling yarn and cloth in Bombay in 1964 and move
to Raipur. There his health improved but not his business. By the mid-1970s,
the family was facing a financial crisis. Harshad, fed up with his life there
came back to the fortune seeker’s Mecca and India’s financial capital.
In Bombay, he got admitted to Lala Lajpat Rai College – not because of
his academic prowess but thanks to his abilities as a cricketer. In an unusual

combination that typifies most of Mehta’s actions, he was a left arm leg
spinner and a right hand batsman. However, Harshad, who would probably
have played for the Madhya Pradesh state team had he lived on in Raipur,
never played for the college team. Instead, he devoted a great deal of his
energy in making money on the side. Thus, when he secured a bachelor of
commerce degree in 1977, it was with barely a passing grade.
Harshad dreamt of making big money while in college but his business
choices were extremely limited. Unlike the then BSE president, Hemendra
Kothari, with whom he crossed swords later, or his buddy bull Nemish Shah
with whom he worked in tandem to create one of the biggest bull runs in the
BSE’s history, Harshad was not born into an affluent family. He had no
capital and no contacts. So the only thing open to him was trading, starting
with delivery work. In the three years he was in college, Harshad peddled
plastic scrap, hosiery and cement among other things, at times lugging
material to the factory sites. This was perhaps the first time he became
familiar with the cement company ACC, whose scrip he would take to
dizzying heights fifteen years later.
In June 1976, Harshad’s brother Ashwin joined him in Bombay, starting
work on 29 th December for ICICI. Two years later, the family business in
ruins, the Mehta clan uprooted itself from Raipur and came to Bombay for
good. Shantilal Mehta was returning to Bombay after fourteen years, a
period that was jokingly referred to within the family as “Rama’s exile”.
Meanwhile, in 1974, one year after Harshad came to Bombay, he met
Jyoti during Dandiya Raas , a collective singing and dancing ceremony of
the Gujaratis that often goes on throughout the night. Harshad used to play
cricket in the same compound where Jyoti lived. Five years after they met,
they married and moved to Vikhroli, a working class neighbourhood a few
kilometres from Ghatkopar.
In 1977, fresh out of college, Harshad joined the New India Assurance
Company as a clerk, at a salary of just Rs 600 a month. He was posted in the
Hull department, processing marine insurance claims. Within a year, the
stock market caught his fancy. He entered the market surreptitiously, betting
a few hundred rupees. Fascinated, he asked for a transfer in 1978 to the
investment department.

But Harshad Mehta hadn’t yet made up his mind about his career. In the
evenings, he used to go to the diamond market and every weekend to Surat,
a southern district in Gujarat, from where he picked up rough diamonds, got
them polished and then resold them. He made about Rs 200 on each of his
weekend trips.
By the end of 1979, he was feeling frustrated. Despite trying his hand at
virtually every business that he could think of, he was nowhere near the high
road to riches. They still had not been able to save enough money to buy a
house. Towards the end of 1979, one night, the family members assembled
for a chat as they used to almost every day after dinner. It was late – about
12 – and Ashwin, who had by then left ICICI to join the Unit Trust of India,
was thinking aloud about the future. “We need contacts and capital to
succeed”, he said. They had neither. “Besides, the diamond market is
depressed. We have to look elsewhere”, he added. Then he suggested: “Let’s
go to the stock markets in the afternoons.”
Their lunch break was for one hour. “We used to finish our lunch in fifteen
minutes and rush to the markets”, recounts Ashwin. The skyscraper that
houses BSE hadn’t yet come up. There used to be a trading ring, where
brokers and jobbers struck deals, located in the adjacent three-storied
structure. The ring was a reserved area, open only to jobbers and brokers.
Harshad was just an onlooker. But he had a burning desire to get in and do
deals.
He cajoled the doorman and stepped in to watch how the world of the
stocks spun on its invisible axis. That afternoon a new chapter began in the
life of Harshad Mehta. A totally unfamiliar world that would be his kingdom
ten years later. Unknown to Mehta, at about the same time, the BSE ring was
becoming the playground for another man, several years younger. He was
Nemish Shah, with whom Harshad had nothing in common. Harshad was
brash, Nemish was measured; Harshad had no money in his pocket, Nemish
came from an affluent family; Harshad’s books were a mess, Nemish’s were
organised. But both had one thing in common: a desire to make it big in
stocks.
The first step Harshad took was to become a jobber whose job is it was to
match buyers and sellers by gesticulating and yelling out quotes.

It is not easy to become a jobber. You needed the backing of a broker.
Harshad went to P Ambalal and requested him to give him a jobber’s badge.
Ambalal, was not too keen. So Harshad gave him his sales talk. “You have
two sons. Consider me as the third.” Ambalal relented. Harshad entered into
a contract with him to do jobbing, with some limits drawn on profits and
losses.
He was off to a terrible start, losing Rs 2000 in his very first set of
transactions. Ambalal got annoyed and stopped him from going to the ring.
Harshad begged and pleaded for another chance. This became a regular
affair. Harshad’s fate was decided on a day-to-day basis, hanging at the end
of each day strictly on that day’s performance. But those precarious months
and years allowed him to hone his skills. “Harshad emerged as one of the
most skilful jobbers, one of the best market makers”, claims Ashwin.
But even a skilful jobber has his limitations. Harshad realised that to stay
ahead of the market he needed hard information in advance. He soon found a
way. He was a jobber for the Premier Auto scrip. One day, in 1980, he
noticed a small newspaper item that said Premier had announced a steep hike
in the price of its automobiles. Harshad calculated that this would lead to a
windfall for the company. But he still needed to know what the Premier plant
was capable of producing to actually take advantage of the higher price.
He went to the plant in the suburbs of Bombay and found out that its fate
rested in the hands of labour unions, led by the militant leader Datta Samant
(later gunned down). Harshad focussed his attention on labour leaders. One
of them lived in Vikhroli, not very far from Harshad’s residence. Harshad
persuaded him to supply him with the daily production data of Premier so
that he could detect the first signs of labour trouble the day production fell.
He developed his contacts further to keep himself abreast of any major
development on the labour front.
Harshad’s drive to determine and monitor the critical factor that could
make or break Premier was a crude attempt at equity research at a time when
the stock market was more of a gambling den than today, shooting up and
down purely on rumours, speculation and money power. Such research,
which forms the backbone of stock trading all over the world, caught on
among a set of young stockbrokers big in the late 1980s. In the US,

Harshad’s use of privileged information on Premier would be classified as
insider trading. However, insider trading was not illegal in India until
November 1992, a loophole that was exploited by Harshad and others to the
hilt during the bull run of late 1991-92. Even after the laws came into effect,
insider trading has remained rampant in the Indian market.
Late that year, Harshad had turned the corner and, by the following year,
was on his way to breaking the shackles of poverty. Apart from giving him
enough money, jobbing also gave him insights into the market. Now he felt
confident of taking positions, i.e., trading in his own account and being
responsible for the profits and losses on it. This brought out the best and
worst in Harshad.
He was great on the floor but extremely sloppy when it came to bookkeeping. The list of disputed trade (where his buying/selling did not match
with the counterparties) was a mile long and his trouser pockets were
bulging with objection memos. That was the forerunner of things to come. In
the bull market that he engineered in 1991-92, Harshad went berserk, not
knowing what his positions and exposures were.
Still, by 1982, Harshad had registered a meteoric rise. He had made
enough money to buy a house in Kandivli, a western suburb, in early 1981,
for Rs 165,000. Part of the profits also went to get Harshad’s brother Ashwin
and their sister married on the same day in December 1981.
Business continued to boom in 1982 and Ashwin left UTI on 19 th
February, to join Harshad. That year Harshad extended his ambit of
“research” to cover scrips like Shree Synthetics, National Rayon and Great
Eastern Shipping. He also applied another technique to make quick gains:
identifying a thinly-traded share early, boosting the price by buying huge
quantities in a very short time and then selling a part of the block. Done
properly, one could make huge gains with very little capital. Harshad teamed
up with Nemish Shah to corner Blow Plast and Bharat Gears. But it was too
ambitious a plan. They kept buying but the price went up only marginally.
They were unable to sell enough to recover their initial investment and soon
exhausted their capital. “Harshad was like Abhimanyu”, recalls Ashwin,
referring to the character in the Mahabharata . “He knew how to get in but
not how to get out.”

But those were heady experiences, short cycles of great excitement and
depression. The thrill of winning and cutting losses was seasoning Harshad
into an excellent market maker, skills that he would apply to money markets
later. He had developed by then, his own distinct style: trusting his own
instincts and reacting with lightning speed. This contrasted sharply with
Ashwin’s style, which was more delibe-rate and based on research. Then
came black Thursday.
It was 18 th March 1982 and the market had opened on a sedate note. Till
1.30 p.m. it seemed that the two-hour trading would pass off uneventfully.
There were minor stirrings as the clock ticked on, past 1.50 p.m. Then
suddenly the entire market went into a convulsion. For the next 15 minutes,
panic selling gripped the market as it recorded one of the fastest falls of the
century. Harshad was virtually ruined.
There was no apparent reason for the free-fall. The carry-forward charges
on outstanding sales had been rigged and an invisible set of hands had
pressed sales. Apparently, the market was hollow within and so caved in
easily. “The prices simply melted”, recalls Ashwin. “Even small positions
resulted in big losses.” Ashwin was at the stock exchange that day and
watched the mayhem unfold right in front of his eyes.
Harshad made large profits on jobbing that day but lost massively on
positions in Tisco, Telco, Century and a few others. In those fateful fifteen
minutes, he had lost about Rs 10 lakh. But he had such huge positions a few
days before, that he could have absorbed a loss of up to Rs 30 lakh. His nose
for the market saved him from going bankrupt. Four days before the 18 th
March crash, Harshad had liquidated his positions without any apparent
reason. Still, the Rs 10 lakh loss turned the Mehtas into paupers. Harshad
had about Rs 3 lakh of his profits, made between 1979-82, parked with a
broker. So, by late March he found himself short by Rs 7 lakh, owed to
brokers JL Shah and Suresh Nandlal Shah. One morning in late March,
Harshad, Ashwin and their father went to Juhu to meet the two brokers. “We
have no assets except our flat and some jewellery. You can take them”,
Harshad’s father told them. They allowed the Mehtas to retain the house and
worked out a schedule of repayment because they still had confidence in
Harshad’s skills. But they took away Harshad’s badge, banishing him from
the floor. To repay part of the money, Harshad pawned his wife’s jewellery.

Left with very little money, Ashwin and Harshad sat around through the
hot months of April and May figuring out ways and means to have another
go at the markets. Interestingly, Ashwin never regretted that he had left a
secure job with UTI and was now in a soup. He had an offer from Hemendra
Kothari and Shitin Desai of DS Purbhoodas to work either in Sri Lanka or
Bombay but refused. From May to December that year the income that
sustained them was neither Harshad’s nor Ashwin’s. It was that of Deepika,
Ashwin’s newly-wed wife. She was earning as much as Rs 10,000 every
month, doing freelance work as a beautician.
Then in the wee hours of the morning of 7 th June 1982, at 2 a.m., Shantilal
Mehta, who was just fifty then, suffered a massive heart attack and expired.
“Had he needed hospitalisation we would have been in deep trouble. We had
no money.” The death was a major psychological blow to Ashwin and
Harshad.
A few weeks after their father died, the two brothers landed up in a holein-the-wall office in a building called Bharat Bhavan at Kalbadevi, the cloth
and yarn-trading centre of Bombay. Harshad’s father had rented an office
there long ago when he was a cloth merchant. The rent was a mere Rs 250
and the office, a covered balcony shared by four. Harshad asked the landlord
if they could use it. “What are you going to do?” he asked them. “We want
to set up a small stock-broking firm.” The landlord consented but increased
the rent to Rs 500.

August 1981, Growmore Consultants was born as a
partnership firm with four partners drawn from the family. Looking
back, it must have appeared to the Mehtas a comical effort at
launching a business. They could just about squeeze in one table
and two chairs. If a visitor came, either Harshad or Ashwin had to
get up and leave the office. They did not have a typewriter, having
sold their father’s new Godrej machine to Reliance Industries for Rs
3,000 to raise seed capital.
On 17

th

So they hired a typist, one D’Mello, on the condition that he bring his own
typewriter. Soon the hired typewriter and the hired typist started churning

out letters for Growmore, letters that solicited surplus money from wealthy
individuals to be channelled into stock markets under portfolio management
schemes. “Growmore’s business strategy rested on the belief that Indian
investors were not getting proper service and advice”, says Ashwin. The
Mehtas felt they could give high returns to clients. They started by looking
for clients among close friends and relatives. Ashwin’s father-in-law, PC
Shah, chipped in with Rs 4 lakh and HR Dhruv, a chartered accountant, put
in Rs one lakh. With a few lakhs in the kitty, the Mehtas started their
selected stock-picking.
Among the first hidden gems they identified was the tea industry. Tea
prices had gone up by, Rs 3-4 a kg but this was still not reflected in the stock
prices of tea companies. That apart, there were specific scrips that seemed
terribly under priced. McLeod Russell was paying a 20% dividend year after
year but was still selling for just Rs 14. The Mehtas bought this scrip
heavily, also picking up Tata Tea and Harrisons & Malayalam. Within a year,
tea shares started shooting up.
The Mehtas looked for bargains during the day, traded in the afternoon
and met clients in the evening. Their monthly brokerage income ranged
between Rs 1500-Rs 2000, made up of many, many cheques of Rs 25 and Rs
50. But it was worth it. “Each month was a better month”, recounts Ashwin,
as Harshad’s high-octane sales pitch fetched clients by the dozens. By
October 1983, they moved out of their cubby-hole in Kalbadevi to a larger
office closer to the stock exchange.
By the first quarter of 1984, the Mehtas realised that though Growmore
was doing the hard job of procuring clients and funds, as sub-brokers they
got only 50% of the fees while the brokers through whom they traded
walked away with half the profits by doing virtually nothing. The obvious
solution was to buy a membership card. In the middle of that year, Harshad
bought a card at the BSE and started operating with it from 12 th December
1984. “It was a dream come true”, says Ashwin. “We felt liberated.” It was
also well timed. The Indian stock markets were on the verge of being
exposed to the first dose of liberal economic policies since independence,
which whipped up one of the most thundering bull runs in many decades.

Ashwin and Harshad identified, anticipated and profited immensely from
this bull phase. In October 1984, Indira Gandhi was gunned down. Rajiv
Gandhi, fresh-faced and clear-eyed, seemed eager to make radical changes
on all fronts. But since he had become Prime Minister so suddenly, very
little was known of his economic thinking. An article in India Today offered
a peep into his mind. The Mehtas noticed it with interest.
By early 1985 Harshad and Ashwin realised that they were standing on
the threshold of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. “We were among the first
to predict that a big boom was coming”, claims Ashwin. They went on a
buying spree, overbuying in every client account. They picked up Indrol
now called Castrol (Harshad bought so much that he was known as Mr
Indrol in the market), Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation and
Zuari Agro.
An amazing boom followed in which Growmore made huge money – so
much that the Mehtas are embarrassed to talk numbers. Profits flowed in till
they lost count. The same year they bought offices in Maker Chambers IV at
Nariman Point. But by then, weaknesses in the Growmore systems crept in.
“We had no experience of running a broking firm”, confesses Ashwin and
this led them to violate prudent norms of capital requirements that are
mandatory in Western coun-tries. At that stage, Growmore may not have met
even the BSE requirements of keeping records properly. They were losing
control.
But 1985 was easily the watershed year, the year of Harshad Mehta. The
market witnessed his meteoric rise and whispers of Growmore’s portfolio
management skills were circulating speedily. People lined up to put their
money in Growmore. Harshad’s popularity, however, sowed seeds of
jealousy among his rivals, most notably the legendary bear, Manu Manek,
the reclusive and publicity abhorring operator who controlled BSE. Manek
was operating almost as a parallel stock exchange, doing massive off-market
deals at prices set by him. Year after year, Manek managed to pack the BSE
board with his nominees and controlled the unions in the BSE, which often
led to curiously-timed strikes and closures.
Strangely, Harshad’s rise during this period was virtually without any help
from UTI, the biggest and the most dominating player in the equity market.

It was presumed that without UTI’s business one simply could not grow big
enough. The domination was so absolute that brokers used to wait outside
the office of KN Atmaramani from 8 in the morning to get orders. Ashwin
claims he was not among them. “I made a conscious decision to stay away
from UTI after I left it in 1982”, he says. Some time in February 1985,
Ashwin met his former boss Atmaramani and the Mehtas started dealing for
UTI. But soon, other favoured brokers mounted a whisper campaign: “They
are speculators”, the allegation went. “They have dumped shares from client
portfolios into UTI.” Their association with UTI started in February 1985
and by June, had turned lukewarm.
In August-September 1985, Ashwin went to London, his first trip abroad,
to study the way broking firms and the London Stock Exchange operated.
He needed the experience. Huge and indiscriminate trading had left
Growmore’s books in a big mess. In December 1985, when the market was
closed for two weeks, the Mehta brothers and even some other members of
the family stayed in the office and cleared up the backlog. Little did they
know that just round the corner lurked a big disaster – the second one in
Harshad Mehta’s broking life.
On 26 th February, SPIC announced a board meeting to consider a 1:1

bonus. The bonus came, yet the price did not go up as much as
Harshad expected. Two days later, VP Singh’s Budget took away
some of the liberal provisions of the long-term fiscal policy
promised just a year before. The market entered a prolonged bear
phase. The first casualty was SPIC and thereby Harshad. It was time
for Manu Manek to strike.
In March 1986, he hammered SPIC down and rumours started floating
that Harshad would not honour his commitment though he had a Rs one
crore margin money lying with BSE. As the rumours took root in the fertile
speculative ground that stock markets are, Manek and his allies met secretly
to plan another assault the moment the market opened for trading after a
four-day holiday. But Harshad had his friends too. At 10 p.m. the same day,
a broker close to both the camps walked into Harshad’s Nariman Point office
and spilled the beans. Ashwin and Harshad ran their computers the whole

night and by 8 in the morning had finished taking stock of their positions,
the margins required and the liabilities.
They then went to Narbheram Harakchand Parekh, a big institu-tional
broker, who had sponsored Harshad’s membership, and asked for his advice.
“The best way to kill the rumour about your possible default is simply to pay
up”, he counselled. Coincidentally, Narbheram Harakchand metamorphosed
into NH Securities later and gave India the next Big Bull, Ketan Parekh. In a
curious turn of fate, in 1999, when Ketan was making prices jump ten times
in a year, he had Ashwin supporting and advising him all the way. Anyway,
the Mehtas contacted MR Mayya, the executive director of BSE, and told
him, “We are ready to meet all our dues. Please tell the board that Harshad’s
payment has come and put that news up on the notice board.” Mayya said, “I
can’t put it up on the notice board but will ensure that nobody rigs the
market on false rumours.”
That weekend the Mehtas drafted a letter asserting that Harshad was not
about to default, attached it to the cheque and delivered it on Monday
morning. Word about Harshad’s payment having come in spread like
wildfire. Mayya called a board meeting and announced it as well. The bears
were stunned. Harshad had made the payment fourteen days in advance.
Unfortunately, many clients refused to pay up the losses and Growmore had
to absorb them, claims Ashwin.
This exposed another weakness of Harshad’s operations: speculating on
own and client accounts. This also led to a critical strategy: not to depend on
the market for funding. It exposes a bull operator to bear squeeze because
the market always gets to know the bull’s position. Harshad, Nemish Shah
and Pallav Sheth all organised funds from external sources. It was either
corporate money or it was bank funds. History was to repeat itself in March
2001. Anand Rathi, the BSE President was accused of trying to find out
Ketan Parekh’s market position on 2 nd March 2001 and was asked to go even
as Big Bull Ketan Parkeh was trying to organise funding against a bear
onslaught.
The debacle did not leave Harshad with unbearable losses but
Rs 1.5 crore of his net worth was wiped out. He had his assets but he was
back to square one. Clearly, Growmore had to be recast. Harshad and

Ashwin realised that they could not afford to risk client money even though,
from 1982, Growmore had averaged returns of more than 80% each year.
“We cleaned up our portfolio and asked all our clients to take their positions
elsewhere”, says Ashwin. Through it all, Harshad went on a forty-five-day
trip to the US and Canada. All this while the family was still staying at
Kandivli and using their first car, a Premier Padmini.
By the third quarter of 1986, the Mehta brothers started with a clean slate.
After the debacle, Ashwin asked Harshad: “Do you want to remain a broker
or be an investor?” They started targeting institu-tional clients for stable and
respectable business though stability and respectability were not the only
reasons Harshad abandoned speculation.
More crucially, Harshad realised that a speculator has no chance of
winning consistently in Indian markets, because of margin requirements. “If
the margin is 40%, you make only Rs 60 every time you book a profit of Rs
100 and pay Rs 140 for every Rs 100 of loss. It is a lose-lose situation”, he
says. “Now, the law of probability says over the long run you win once lose
once. If you win twice consecutively, your chances of losing the next time
are double and so is the probable loss. So when the loss hits, you are wiped
out.”
Harshad soon emerged as one of the top institutional brokers. But he was
still not getting business from UTI. This was partly because of opposition by
entrenched brokers but there was another grave reason. The story goes that
UTI had mistakenly sent some shares of Vam Organics to Harshad which he
promptly sold off.
Harshad denies this story and stops a discussion on his problems with UTI
with a tone of finality: “People spread canards about me.” Apparently, when
chairman MJ Pherwani discovered the fiddle, he blackballed the Mehtas.
Curiously, Pherwani would later bail Harshad out when he needed Rs 622
crore to pay back SBI.
Harshad says that UTI was biased against him. His strategy was to first
become the dominant broker with all other institutions like insurance
companies. “We wanted to tackle UTI last”, he says. UTI was huge. It could
make or break a broker. But luckily for him, its dominance was on the wane.

Other aggressive funds like Canbank Mutual came up. Harshad could still
grow without doing much business with UTI.
He was on his way to becoming an institutional broker. But it was not
enough. His ears were still ringing with a question thrown at him by Ashwin
after the great debacle of 1986: “Do you want to remain a broker for the rest
of your life?” Of course, he didn’t. He wanted to be a principal – buying and
selling on own account and keeping the profits. But this required huge sums
of money – money that was outside the stock market system. In India, bank
finance is not available for investments in large amounts. So the everingenuous Harshad found a new quarry: the money market.
Beginning 1987 Harshad embarked on five years of breathtaking growth
in both the money market and the stock markets, leading to accumulation of
immense personal wealth. But Harshad’s entry into the money market also
touched off an intense battle with him on one side and Citibank and its three
loyal brokers on the other. Under-standing that war is crucial to
understanding the Harshad Mehta stream of the scam.

Chapter 5
The Big Bull
“I thought I’d be like
a pied piper. I thought
I can start selling
dreams because
somebody needed to
come and sell
dreams, that asset
creation is not a
crime....”

ON Sunday 26 th April, three days after The Times of India broke the scam
story, concealing his name and referring to him as the Big Bull, Harshad
attended an insignificant seminar titled “Gold import scheme and the Indian
market” at the hotel Leela Kempinsky in Bombay. There he admitted that
indeed The Times story was referring to him and asserted that his reconciliation problem with SBI was over. He even tried to cover a crucial track: the
source of money for his stock purchases. He denied that his securities
reconciliation problem had anything to do with the stock market.
At the same meeting, tax consultant HP Ranina, who had sold his control
in the sick Mazda Industries to Harshad but retained his chairmanship,
described Harshad as the Einstein of the stock market, correcting somebody
else who had earlier called Harshad the Amitabh Bachchan of the Bombay
Stock Exchange. Even such unbridled vacuous fawning by Ranina, one of
India’s best-known tax lawyers, was not the most significant point at that
Sunday morning meeting, which was reported only by The Observer of
Business and Politics in a small single-column five-para item. It quoted
Harshad as saying that his securities reconciliation problem was

misconstrued. What Harshad said he attempted was only “breaking the
monopoly of foreign banks as market makers in the securities market.”
Nobody realised it then but it was one of the most significant statements
made by anybody since the scam story broke. It was a rare confession from a
consummate salesman. This was the first time Mehta had disclosed his
strategy, one of the key motives behind what he had been doing. Earlier, he
had tried to rationalise the high market index and his purchase of scrips at
ridiculous prices by citing suspicious sounding investment theories. In
reality, he was engaged in a bloody war with a set of powerful brokers and
foreign banks in both money and stock markets.
That story, coinciding with the last phase of Harshad’s phenomenal rise,
begins in 1987, when his war with the cartel of brokers and Citibank began;
1991-92 was the culmination of that war – with the discovery of the scam.
Between this half decade lies the compelling story of the growth of a Big
Bull, the first superstar of the Indian stock market.
Harshad’s entry into the closed cabal of the money market in 1987, after
his broking business went belly-up in 1986, was a logical business move, but
at the same time, highly unusual. None of the leading old-time stockbrokers
like Prabhudas Lilladhar, CJ Dalal or Mahendra Kampani, were in the
money market. Neither were the new rising stars like Nemish Shah or Pallav
Sheth. So what drove Harshad to it? There were three factors. First, the need
to have access to big money so that he shed his broker’s garb and emerged as
an investor. Second, he was a restless creature who needed a constant stream
of fresh stimuli for his burning ambitions. As he came into contact with
banks, insurance and mutual funds, the world of money markets opened up
to him. The third factor was more mundane. Harshad wanted to diversify his
revenue streams and not be too dependent on stock-broking income.
But Harshad’s move into money market sparked off a battle with the
status quo. “For first six months I simply observed the market and figured
out that it was the fiefdom of four brokers and one bank”, recalls Harshad.
“The bank was Citibank. And the brokers were Ajay Kayan of Calcutta,
Bhupen Dalal, Jitu Shroff and Hemendra Kothari.” In addition, Kothari, who
had a limited understanding of the money market, had a special relationship
with UTI. UTI not only routed large and profitable stock trading through

Kothari’s firms but picked up money market deals from other brokers,
aborted the deals and passed them on to Kothari.
Citibank and three brokers (other than Bhupen Dalal) formed a cartel.
While Citibank contributed the brains, the brokers contributed the contacts
and ability to “influence” treasury officials of public sector banks. These
brokers were completely loyal to Citibank, faithfully carrying out
transactions and earning a good brokerage income. As Harshad entered the
market, he ran afoul of Citibank and its cartel who refused to deal with him.
AS Thiyagarajan, the chief of investment banking at Citibank said that he
“never dealt with Harshad because I didn’t like his flashy ways.” Besides,
Citibank had no reason to entertain new brokers as Kayan and other cartel
members were ever willing to toe its line.
Harshad had a different interpretation. “They were scared that I would do
to the money market what I had done in the stock market where I was
dealing only with institutions and giving them good deals. The cartel thought
‘we can’t take a chance with this guy.’ I was a threat. So when I started
trading, the news went to Citibank which controlled the entry and exit to the
money markets. And among its brokers Ajay Kayan was the king. They were
chasing me on a minute-to-minute basis on every deal, but I did not want to
remain a broker. I started taking positions. For brokers to take positions was
a crime, according to Citibank. But I refused to be a slave.”
In his characteristic fashion, Harshad tore into the cosy world of the cartel.
What helped him was the common distaste other trading banks had of
Citibank’s dominance. Both ANZ Grindlays Bank and the Bank of America
found out that they were getting shut out of big deals, which were being
cornered by Citibank and its cartel. This was because the crucial element of
a bond deal is market information: who has surplus units, whose cash flow is
tight, etc. “For any deal that I proposed”, recalled a former BankAm
employee, “Citibank and its cartel got to know. We desperately needed a
non-cartel broker.”
Harshad was the man who fit the bill.
BankAm and Harshad were made for each other. BankAm’s treasury was
then headed by Neeraj Batra, later chief of Prime Securities. (Prime was

raided by the Income Tax department in September 1992 for its widely
suspected links with Harshad.) Batra and Harshad emerged as star traders.
They became thick trading buddies, especially dominating the market for
units. Harshad’s rise was the first sign of threat to the cartel. They watched
him with curiosity and irritation.
Mehta had another early ally, Naresh Aggarwala, who would later join the
cartel and become Harshad’s arch enemy. In 1989 when Aggarwala left
Grindlays to strike out on his own, the bank kept alive its relationship with
him. Since the cartel blocked its way sometimes, Grindlays, like BankAm,
was keen on a stable relationship with a non-cartel broker. Aggarwala, who
incidentally had not dealt with Citibank in his independent career, promised
to deliver one – Harshad Mehta. Harshad became extremely thick with
Grindlays. This was clear in the manner in which the bank went out of its
way to help him square off his Rs 622 crore outstanding with State Bank of
India by crediting to his account cheques coming from the National Housing
Bank.
What was Harshad’s strategy in the money market battle? He recounts: “I
realised that in money markets, the crucial thing was communication. So I
gave hotlines to all brokers. Hemendra Kothari of DS Purbhoodas said, ‘We
don’t need your hotline. We deal only with banks, directly’.” Harshad
wanted to break the cartel’s lock by capturing large volumes. “I was not
running after profits alone. Citibank’s brokers wanted a profit on every deal.
I was prepared to take small losses. My goal was to prove that I can do
whatever Citibank can.”
After Batra and Harshad teamed up to do some large deals, the market and
the list of players started expanding. Subsidiaries of nationalised banks and
public-sector companies were allowed to trade. According to Harshad, this
helped him because the cartel had restricted itself to certain banks like
Vijaya Bank, SBI, Punjab National Bank and a couple of Calcutta-based
nationalised banks. “That made it easier for me. I could trade outside
Citibank’s ambit and survive.” It helped Naresh Aggarwala as well who says
he “never traded with Citibank.” Of course, according to Harshad “after
shunning us for years, Citibank started trading with us through other brokers.
They could no longer ignore our deals and therefore paid the price for their
ego.” Indeed, in 1991-92, Citibank had some very large deals with Harshad.

All through 1987-90, the three years Harshad was trying to break into the
money market, he was reaping millions in stock markets, partly by diverting
the money market funds there. This reached its peak in the turbulent 1991-92
period when Harshad recklessly used the banking system for stock trading. It
was a closely guarded secret though. In 1991, The Economic Times asked
him where his money was coming from. “The funds have come from my
clients who are mainly corporate bodies”, he shot back.
Harshad emerged as a major broker for all financial institutions except
UTI and was on his way to acquiring princely personal wealth that normally
takes generations to accumulate. Since 1989, he had been looking for a
house large enough to accommodate the family of four brothers, their mother
and grandfather who was almost 100 years old.
The task of finding a suitable apartment was entrusted to Jyoti, Harshad’s
wife. “There was not a single broker in Bombay who did not end up
knowing her”, recalled Ashwin. After a two-year search, in 1990, they
settled for an apartment in Madhuli, the whole of third floor and half of the
fourth. The swank 15,000 square feet apartment overlooks the sea at Worli
and is flanked by huge terrace gardens; the one on the seaside, converted
into a putting green. The Mehtas planned to have a mini theatre and a
billiards room on the third floor but the work remained incomplete. In 1992,
parts of the apartment looked like a construction site, with wires dangling
and building material in heaps.
Half of the fourth floor was split down the middle by a corridor; on the
left side was Dr Hitesh Mehta’s room. It was all in white – white walls,
marble floor, a huge head of a horse in white marble and dashes of red and
orange for some colour. Down the corridor on the left corner was Ashwin’s
room with a sweeping view of the Arabian Sea and opposite that, on the
right, Harshad’s bedroom, where the predominant colours were black and
gold. Each of these bedrooms was fitted with glitzy artefacts in glass, metal
and crystal reflecting an overdose of professional interior design and kitsch.
Instead of paintings, the walls had laminated off-the-peg designs in pastel
colours. Below these bedrooms, on the third floor, was the kitchen and on
the other half of the third floor, the bedroom of the fourth brother, Sudhir
Mehta.

Their parking lot had gradually filled up with the numerous cars the
Mehtas bought – twenty-nine in all. The pride of Harshad’s garage was, of
course, the famous brown Toyota Lexus, a star attraction in Europe and
America in 1991, as it represented the Japanese assault on the luxury car
segment, dominated till then by BMW and Mercedes Benz. Harshad’s was
the first Lexus imported into India.
All this made Harshad perhaps the wealthiest and flashiest stockbroker in
India but still, even in early 1991, very few people were aware of who and
what he was. Some referred to him as the ACC bull for the way he dragged
the scrip from Rs 300 to Rs 3000 and then past Rs 10,000. (Even a shrewd
broker like Harshad’s friend Nemish Shah exited the ACC counter at Rs
3500 and then openly expressed his regret.) Over 1991, as Harshad acquired
his house and his cars, he also acquired the title Big Bull – a two-word
epithet that is reserved for those who have that awesome power to light a fire
in scrips that catch their fancy.
That title originally belonged to MJ Pherwani, when, as chairman of UTI,
he held the fate of the market in his forefinger that was poised over the
button BUY. Then came Harshad who overshadowed Pherwani many times
over. Pherwani had a twenty-five-year-old institution behind him. Harshad
was an individual. Pherwani played with Rs 20,000 crore, Harshad, a
fraction of that. Pherwani operated at a time when UTI was the only big
player in the market. Harshad was one of many.
Yet, over the next year, Harshad displayed a brute power to move the
market over 100 points, either way, at will and turned himself into a market
legend. Awe-struck investors whispered that he was signing cheques of over
Rs 100 crore as margin payment to BSE (not true, he said), that he knew
about the Union Budget (unlikely), and that he was a channelling money
belonging to smugglers (untrue). But in those heady days, when prices were
shooting up and Harshad was stampeding on the floor of the stock
exchanges, who had the time to check these rumours? They gained currency,
creating a myth.
Harshad’s men would announce in advance the stock that he planned to
push, its target peak price, and the time frame in which he would hit it. Often
when one of his employees merely enquired the price of a new stock in the

trading ring, its price shot up. Harshad’s hold on public imagination touched
absurd heights in the case of the Swaraj Mazda scrip. There was nothing this
company had in common with Mazda Industries, the loss-making leasing
company that Harshad had taken over and turned around, except the name
Mazda. Swaraj Mazda, which produces light commercial vehicles, is a joint
venture of Mazda of Japan and the Punjab government. Harshad had nothing
to do with it. Yet the Swaraj Mazda scrip jumped up on rumours that
Harshad Mehta was buying another “Mazda company”.
What he did to the real Mazda was remarkable. When he took it over,
Mazda Industries, set up during the leasing boom of the 1980s, was a “lossmaking leasing company”, declared Ranina. Harshad planned to publish
quarterly results instead of six-monthly results (profit was up to Rs 2.7
crore). He did this along with an advertisement that screamed “Doom, Boom
and Zoom”, describing the dramatic turnaround. Referring to the company as
a “Growmore Corporate”, the advertisement promised expansion into the
real estate business, exports and “innovative financial instruments” and a
listing at all major exchanges.
In just six months to September 1992, Mazda Industries earned a net
profit of Rs 3.38 crore from a Rs 3.46 crore loss the previous year. Its main
source of income, leasing, slumped from Rs 3.28 crore to just Rs 30 lakh.
But this was more than compensated by “other income” of Rs 5.19 crore,
which was raw profits from stock trading. Around the same time, JS
Varshneya, chairman of PNB, joined the Mazda board. Harshad took over
Mazda Packaging as well, renaming it Mazda Enterprises. In a matter of
months, Mazda was rocketing up. On 19 th October, the price was just Rs 39.
It jumped to Rs 140 by December and Rs 400 by February. Then in a
mammoth leap it touched Rs 1600 the following month, touching off
frenzied buying. Three months after Harshad’s arrest, the price had slumped
back to Rs 40.
In all this Harshad was not a shadowy character who quietly made it big.
In the pre-Harshad days, market dominance was through speculative
operations. Harshad was inventive (bordering, some say, on conmanship),
brazen and extremely ambitious. Through a highly publicised lifestyle and
grand slogans, he built tremendous hype and personal following that he
exploited to move the market.

Harshad was the perfect huckster, a contrarian thinker and an ambitious
go-getter – all rolled in one. Market analysts, who go by the traditional
measure of share pricing like the price-earnings ratio, were stunned by
Harshad. Even though there are no hard and fast rules that specify the level
of P/E at which a share is fully priced, there are acceptable and commonly
shared benchmarks. For instance, a P/E of 40 or 50 would normally be
considered high and a signal that it was time to sell. Serious market analysts
had a rule of thumb: a scrip with a P/E of less than 15 was under priced and
one above 25 was over priced.
Harshad refused to be stunted by conventional limits of P/E. He
propounded his own investment theories that made the entire market look
like a screaming buy. His theory rested on two planks: one, that the price of
a scrip is independent of its current earnings (and so P/E is irrelevant) and
two, that at high prices people don’t sell, they buy! Harshad argued that in a
growing economy, a high P/E is itself a great reason for growth, a reason for
buying such expensive stocks. “A high P/E stock is a higher-than-average
performer. So, contrary to what is commonly believed, this scrip is not one
to be sold. In a growing market you can make more money in high P/E
scrips than in low P/E ones. A 10% earnings growth in a scrip with a P/E of
50 means a further growth in price. Why do shares of foreign companies
attract a high P/E?” he asked.
Harshad had a second weapon to demolish the P/E as the yardstick: his
replacement cost theory, which became one of the most fashionable theories
during the boom months. This rested on the argument that the true value of a
company, such as ACC, is not in just what it earns. Its strength lies in the
fact that to set up the same productive assets, it would cost a new entrant
several times more than what it cost ACC. ACC’s value, therefore, ought to
be at least what it would cost to replace it, at today’s prices. In a market that
is more than a gambling den, this theory fascinated many. And in a market
that was desperate for a reason to buy, this was a masterly excuse.
Harshad took this theory further when talking to V Krishnamurthy,
member, Planning Commission. In February 1992, when they had their
famous meeting, Krishnamurthy asked how was it that while the realisable
value of ACC’s assets was Rs 3500 crore, the market capitalisation (total
equity multiplied by the market price) was Rs 5500 crore? In other words,

how did the market put a value higher than what it costs to replace it at
today’s prices? “I said it is not important what ACC possessed. The question
is what it could have. Taking advantage of its market price, ACC could raise
another Rs 2200 crore by doubling its present capital of Rs 56 crore. With
that it can add another seven million tonnes capacity. Even if ACC pays a
dividend of 100%, i.e., Rs 56 crore, its cost of funds is 2-3%.” In other
words, the market is paying a premium for ACC’s ability to raise money
cheaply by taking advantage of its goodwill. Harshad pointed out plenty of
other such examples. “Excel has a capital base of Rs 70 crore and market
capitalisation of Rs 600 crore. DCL Polyester was Rs 55 even before it
started production. So, what’s so different about ACC?”
Harshad was full of such investment theories, some smart some selfserving. Listen to this Harshad’s explanation of what motivates people to
buy and sell: “In some ways the psychology of people in Japan and Junagad
is the same. Under specific circumstances, people in a highly literate and
illiterate society behave the same way. An MBA and pan-wallah share the
same drive. If the Dow Jones theory is applicable to the most sophisticated
market in New York then it is also applicable to oil trading in Jamnagar”,
Harshad told Business Today in the course of a long interview in September
1992, after he was released.

“The basic economic law of demand-supply-price works just the reverse
way in stock markets. Textbooks tell you that the price of a commodity is
high when the demand is low. Also, supply is low when the price is low. In
stock markets, it is the other way round. If the stock prices are on the
upswing, the demand is also high. And when the price is falling, demand
also falls and the supply increases.”
Whether this is always true in all markets is doubtful. But it has been
proved somewhat true in India in the bull as well as the bear market. There
were no takers for even blue-chip shares in the depressing period of January
1991, when the BSE sensitive index fell below 1000. But when the index
crossed 3500 and 4000 there was a mad scramble to pick up the same shares
at exorbitant prices. This was so, Harshad would argue, because stock
markets are primarily driven by perception, not performance.

The price of a share is based on the perception you have of it, argued
Harshad and this perception is not based on what its past has been but what
the future is going to be. Harshad cited the example of Great Eastern
Shipping. “When Nemish (Shah) started buying it, the scrip was available at
Rs 35 cum bonus. One year later, there was no big change in the shipping
industry. Look at the two balance sheets. No big change. Yet the price was
Rs 180. Nemish made you marry that share”, argues Harshad.
Harshad’s logic may have been true in a sense (one savvy stock-broker
friend of his calls it “a load of crap”) but was fraught with dangerous
implications. It meant that Harshad could buy a completely dud share and
make its price fly no matter what he was buying and why. Harshad’s
perception theory reached its logically absurd end when several loss-making
companies like Karnataka Ball Bearing and Amar Dyechem were quoting at
crazy prices just because Harshad was said to be buying.
Harshad caught the BSE sensitive index by its collar and pulled it through
1500 and 2000 until on 24 th February 1992, it was 2491. Then on 29 th
February came the Union Budget and Harshad’s big bull charge. In two
months flat, Harshad whipped up the index by another astounding 2000
points, taking it to 4467 on 22 nd April, the day before the scam story broke.
Along with this, the value of scrips on BSE (market capitalisation) ballooned
from Rs 60,000 crore in 1990 to Rs 125,000 crore at the end of 1991 and
then zipped upwards to over Rs 250,000 crore in the next four months.
That the boom was single-handedly engineered by Harshad Mehta is
without doubt. The index simply wilted after the scam story broke on 23 rd
April. On 28 th April, the first day that BSE opened for trading after Harshad
was known to be in trouble, the index dropped to 3896, the same level it was
a month earlier. In the first three months of 1992, the more the market
boomed, the louder were Harshad’s drumbeats. He kept on chanting the
mantra “buy, buy, buy” backing it up with brash statements. Students of mob
psychology could possibly debate on this phenomenon of mass hysteria that
Harshad unleashed – just as Ketan Parekh did a decade later. Of course,
later, Harshad would claim quite innocently to the Asian Wall Street Journal
that “I thought I’d be like a pied piper. I thought I can start selling dreams,
because somebody needed to come here and sell dreams, that asset creation

is not a crime, that if you wanted to be a Harshad Mehta, come to the stock
market.”
People did, and soon Harshad started exploiting his new-found stock
market stardom, his crowd-pulling abilities and the perception theory to
formulate a shady new move: alliances with businessmen to boost their stock
prices. Harshad later told Business Today magazine that “the managements
never looked closely at the value of their own scrips. I made them aware.
Reliance was quoted at Rs 130-140. Everybody was tired. Mutual funds
were buying heavily. Nothing happened. Some 80 lakh shares were bought. I
started buying at Rs 140-170. I bought 11 lakh shares and the price went to
Rs 370-390. Is it not a matter of perception?” Businessmen were quick to
realise the potential of this new stock market Midas. They approached
Harshad to push their scrips. Harshad struck a deal with them. He would
jack up the prices provided they gave him a stake. Exactly the same thing
Ketan Parekh did later on.
In 1991, he picked up large blocks of shares of certain companies (Apollo
Tyres, Gujarat Ambuja) but not with the intention to take over these
companies, as was quickly presumed. He did not even demand board
membership. He simply intended to demonstrate what he could do to their
share prices. He bought large stakes only to emerge as an ally of the
promoters, as one who made them realise that their companies are worth far
more than they thought. As the prices flared up, Harshad made huge profits
because he had made large block purchases outside the market well before
prices were pushed up. This made the average price of acquisition extremely
low. When the stock was high enough, mutual funds could always be
tempted into believing that they had before them a unique investment
opportunity and Harshad would offload his stock. This was insider trading
and milking mutual funds in its most raw form, to be repeated by many
operators before and after Harshad.
His brilliantly fashioned but suspicious-looking arguments were soon
grabbed by other bull operators desperately looking for a rational
justification for the boom. One of them was Pallav Sheth. He told Business
India in April 1992 that “the market can be expected to reach the 6000 index
by the last quarter of 1992.” He argued that perception about equity

investment had changed. “The P/E ratio is not the issue any longer”,
declared Sheth. And why so? Sheth referred to the US, which, despite being
considered a stable market, had companies like General Motors and Union
Carbide reporting losses at the end of the 1980s but were quoted at prices of
US $45 and US $98.
The reason, said Sheth, sounding like a visionary professor of finance and
investment, is that replacement cost was gaining precedence over traditional
indicators like the P/E ratio. In the face of the volatility of today’s market,
expostulated Sheth, traditional indicators seem to be losing relevance. “Take
the case of Reliance Industries”, he told Business India . “At Rs 500 per
share for 150 million shares, the present investment is Rs 7500 crore. But if
the Reliance’s plant is replaced, it will cost Rs 20,000 crore today.
Fundamentals are less in fashion, in purely financial terms. The accent is on
good intentions of the management and good performance. A good example
is Reliance again. Its Euro-market issue, gas cracker plant and proposed
power project attract people because these seem to have good prospects.”
Sheth argued that people are buying with an eye to the future. He told
Business India that the present prices should be measured against 1994-95
when companies will be reporting a different pattern of profit.
These arguments appeared phoney later, especially when it became clear
that brokers like Sheth substantially traded on inside information and pushed
up prices. They had their eyes on the next few weeks and months, not quite
patiently waiting for their humble efforts to yield fruits in 1994-95 as they
preached to the investors. But when Harshad was the money messiah
stalking the markets, followed by the likes of Pallav Sheth, the public was
led to believe that Harshad was a brilliant stock picker deriving his stock
alchemy from investment theories and research. Harshad’s brother Ashwin,
of course, was keen on developing a research base in the manner of
securities houses world-wide. But Harshad totally disagreed with him,
arguing that nobody valued research in India. Harshad himself was
demonstrating that hype and slogans were the most potent growth elixirs in a
shallow and unregulated market like India, where the biggest players are
government-owned, uncompetitive, slothful creatures operating with their
limbs tied down.

Apart from external factors, Harshad had his own reasons to be confident.
His perception theory, debunking P/Es and deals with industrialists were
innovative and effective moves that could come only from someone who
knew the market inside out and was applying those insights to get rich quick.
Harshad had become so versatile by 1991 that he could later claim that “I
believe I have had a wider exposure to the market than anybody else. I have
been a jobber, a broker and at one time the biggest speculator. For over
thirteen years on the floor I have had the opportunity of knowing the
psychology of the investors, and on the other side, knowing the psychology
of the institutions, the psychology of the corporate managements.”
By late 1991, however, this knowledge was at work in a dangerous
direction. Harshad started believing that he was god and thereby started
losing control over himself. Ashwin refused to agree with his means and the
scorching pace he had set for himself. He planned to separate their
businesses. “Our relationship was cordial at home and lukewarm in office”,
said Ashwin. Harshad had become the biggest broker, the largest market
player and among the wealthiest Indians. Had he continued at this scale,
within a year he would have entered the Forbes list of billionaires. But
Harshad refused to slow down. The heady scent of success went right to his
head.

“I work more with my heart than with my head. My strength is my
intuition. I operate from imagination, not from calculated thinking”, Harshad
would admit later. But in the boom days it didn’t seem a drawback. He was
dreaming on a giga-scale then. “I burn inside”, he told us in late October
1992. “I can’t stop dreaming big.” For instance, since in late 1991 he was
seized with an obsessive desire to beat the world’s largest securities firm,
Merrill Lynch (which has a tie-up with Kothari’s DS Purbhoodas in India) in
profits. He procured the 1990-91 annual report of Merrill to discover that it
had earned US $690 million in profits that year.
Harshad told himself that he wouldn’t take too long to beat that. If you
counted his unrealised profits of Rs 1000 crore as on March 1992, he had
already reached the halfway mark. And without Merrill’s infrastructure and
network. “They have a staff of 40,000, dealing from apples to silver,
operating in scores of markets, getting money from Arabs to Japanese, some
200 offices around the world, including one in India. I was working with one

commodity (shares), one market (India), 200 people, low technology and in
a regulated environment loaded against the bulls.” Harshad was, of course,
aware of the obvious counter argument. “You can say that I have done it
with scam money”, he said. But he had an explanation that would satisfy his
fans: “They have access to cheap bank funds that I didn’t have. Let me have
a line of credit and I will show what can be done.”
Harshad’s ambitions scorched him from within. His obsession with his
own sense of achievement made him reduce it all to such simple arithmetic:
“what are my profits today and in comparison what are the profits of Telco,
India’s largest company?” Such juvenile compari-sons and oversimplified
measures of success took permanent root in his mind. Perhaps they fulfilled
a psychological need, acting as a surrogate for genuine recognition and a
desire to be considered among the greatest and the best. As one of his friends
commented: “Harshad was not happy being the biggest. His happiness lay in
others telling him repeatedly that he was the biggest.” Not content with even
that, he invented such measures of success as beating Merrill Lynch and
Telco. Harshad was desperate to be seen as an institution and not as a
Johnny-come-lately.
So, to institutionalise himself and gain respectability, since late 1991,
Harshad started collecting, as a hunter collects heads, big names from the
world of business and finance. The first was ND Prabhu, former chairman of
Canara Bank, who became a director in Mazda Industries. Harshad wanted
him to head the Growmore Stockholding Corporation and the southern India
headquarters of Harshad’s empire. To be located at Bangalore, it was
planned to oversee Harshad’s investments in Karnataka Ball Bearing,
Karnataka Explosives, and other state government-assisted companies that
Harshad was planning to take over.
Harshad had also roped in JS Varshneya, former chairman of PNB and an
advisor to NHB which Harshad used almost as his private bank. After the
scam was discovered, Varshneya was allowed to quietly retire and disappear
from public view. But among the prize additions to Harshad’s network was
V Krishnamurthy who would have served as his vital Delhi link. Harshad
impressed him so much that within months they were deep into business
deals. This was awkward because Krishnamurthy was holding a very

sensitive post as member, Planning Commission and was the head of the
public sector disinvestment panel.
If Harshad needed to wear his success on his Armani shirt sleeves, he did
virtually just that. On the morning of 10 th January 1992, he screamed at an
unsuspecting but curious populace from half-page newspaper
advertisements: “Harshad Mehta is a liar”. This campaign, created by Lintas
in stark black and white, was a gimmick to explain the investment strategy
of his Growmore group of companies, a strategy that supposedly hinged on
research and analysis. The advertisement accurately reflected Harshad’s
hyper-articulate, brash and trumpeting nature. That was the first time
Harshad had communi-cated to the public in any form. After all, his main
vehicle, Growmore, was an unlisted company, it wasn’t yet time for the
Mazda annual general meeting and he hadn’t yet been discovered by the
media.
He was, after the advertisement appeared. By February, the biggest
business magazine, Business India and the newest one, Business Today had
him on their covers and the top-selling video magazine, Newstrack , did a
celebratory story on him, describing his fabulous lifestyle, his beautiful
terraces, twenty-nine cars, etc. This was followed by the news that he was
India’s highest tax-payer.
After making and losing crores and after working in the shadows for a
decade, Harshad Mehta had suddenly burst forth in a blaze of publicity. On
28 th February 1992, one day before the Union Budget, he was raided by the
Income Tax authorities, but that did not stop Doordarshan from interviewing
him on the day the Budget was announced. Asked to comment on the Indian
economy and the capital markets he gave millions of Indians one of his
many memorable one-liners: “India is a turnaround scrip in the world
market.”
Harshad may have believed this but he was also working to a plan. All
through 1991, he was continuously using the banking system’s money to
fund his stock market operations. But he was precariously poised. Having
staked bank funds through dubious transactions, he was living on borrowed
money. He had to return the money, which he could if only he had sold a part

of his stake. This wasn’t easy. If he had sold his shares, the price could have
crashed because Harshad the God was now selling. He could have dumped
them into the portfolios of mutual funds but the biggest mutual fund,
Canbank Mutual Fund, was not doing deals with him; also, every big broker
was trying to use these funds in the same way. As the prices reached giddy,
stratospheric levels in March 1992, Harshad was looking for an exit. “Exit is
more important than entry. It is easy to buy. Where does one sell? Unless
you have created a market to sell.” He thought he had found not one but two
of them.
The first was getting foreign investors to buy Indian stocks at those prices.
At that time, Indian stock markets were still closed to foreigners but the
finance minister had promised in his Budget speech that foreign funds were
soon to be allowed to invest here, a promise he fulfilled in October 1992.
Harshad saw this as a great opportunity. “We have the potential to sell our
stocks all over the world”, he said in October 1992. “India is the greatest
opportunity going. Even at the index level of 4500, the UTI chairman said
Indian markets are a great place to invest in.”
The second was to go outside the circle of institutional buyers and bring in
new investors. They were already coming in droves thanks to the fan
following Harshad had built up among businessmen, bureau-crats and
ordinary investors. “The market was getting widened. We were planning to
build a distribution base. We were also planning to take a couple of
Growmore companies public, targeting to raise about Rs 500-600 crore. But
six months before that destiny has played its role”, Harshad later said.
It wasn’t destiny alone. One of the main reasons for his downfall was
Harshad’s relentless battle for market supremacy and his attempt to win it at
any cost. In 1987, Harshad had entered the money market out of curiosity
and had to fight against an established cartel of banks and brokers. As he
won his place there, Harshad soon became aware that the money market
could be used as a bottomless fuel tank that could fire a stock boom where
the pickings were the easiest. As he did that he ran a foul of the same set of
players.
We have already documented Harshad’s war in the money market; it
spilled over to the stock market in early 1991. That war lies at the heart of

the scam story. Harshad was winning it hands down – by fair means or foul –
until the scam was discovered.

Chapter 6
A Bloody War
The bears had been
severely mauled by
Harshad. They had
by then changed their
position and were
turning bullish,
leaving Harshad a
dubious victor in a
senseless war. But
Harshad’s win was
also his loss. He
himself had lost
balance and ended up
being the villain in
the greatest scam
ever.

CALCUTTA 14 th March 1992: On the green, expansive lawns of 9/2
Hungerford Street, surrounding a brilliant, white double-storied bungalow,
the best-known money managers of this country were clinking their glasses.
Dominating the crowd were stockbrokers and the treasury chiefs of the
foreign and large Indian banks. Surprisingly, Harshad Mehta was absent.
This was no ordinary occasion for the money-men. It was the housewarming party of Ajay Kayan, part-owner of a network of four securities
and share broking firms – one of the most powerful in India. He had just
moved into his new home, located in the heart of the city, behind the wellknown Belle Vue nursing home. It was an address that any local
businessman country would envy. Kayan’s house was all polished marble

floors, done up with antiques, crystal, an ivory Ganesha carved out of a
single tusk, and huge Japanese vases. Designed by the well-known Hemant
Thakkar, it was a showpiece. The same house would be raided by the
Income Tax authorities in late August.
As Kayan greeted a stream of visitors that cool, Saturday evening, he
looked comfortable. (14 th March was just the first day of a five-day
celebration, each day reserved for a separate group – local business-men,
out-of-town businessmen, etc). A powerful player in both securities and
stock markets, Kayan had thrived on his trading connection with the
aggressive US bank, Citibank, as also American Express and deep links with
two outfits of Canara Bank– Canbank Financial Services and Canbank
Mutual Fund. That evening Kayan had much to celebrate. In a glaring
miscalculation he had lost crores in the stock market by selling short key
scrips, or so his rivals believed. But with friends like Citibank and Canfina
he would not only manage to recover his losses, he would be in the black.
Kayan’s reputation was intact. Tucked away in the dying city of Calcutta,
here was a man who could scoop up crores in a jiffy for his favoured
corporate clients.
The party drove home that point forcefully. Beyond the sprawling lawn,
the guests were spilling over into the house and the specially created
gambling room with Indian style divans and gaddis to roll on. A staircase
lined with B Prabha’s theme paintings led the guests to another living room
from where music emanated.
The mood was upbeat because the invitees were set to conquer the world.
The conversation flowed over liquor and high stakes at the rummy table,
reflecting the risks that the players were willing to take. Naresh Aggarwala
told a banker, “Who needs counterparties? Banks will have to do business
directly with brokers.”
It was an evening of checking out rumours and swapping gossip. A banker
asked one of the big operators about his group’s plans to acquire a
membership on the New York Stock Exchange. He half expected an outright
denial, but received instead a confirmation. And this wasn’t even the Big
Bull. But a card in the NYSE was not such a big deal, he pointed out later.

“What does a NYSE membership cost? US $775,000”, he answered himself.
“That’s around Rs 2.5 crore. You paid as much to buy a card at the Bombay
Stock Exchange (BSE) at the height of the boom.” Another was negotiating
for a luxury yacht. “I think it is a cruise ship they were talking about”, said
one banker. Alok Aggarwal of BankAm quipped: “I don’t ride a Toyota or a
Suzuki these days. I’m riding a Mazda”, referring to what Harshad was
doing to the Mazda Industries scrip.
They were all there, that evening. The chairman of Canara Bank, ND
Prabhu, the finance whiz of ITC Feroze Vevaina, Munnu Chand of Classic
Financial, brokers Pallav Sheth, Paresh Khandwala and Jitu Shroff, treasury
chiefs Sandip Sachdeva of BankAm, businessman Ghanshyam Sarda and, of
course, Kayan’s chief patron, Ramesh Maheshwari of Texmaco, owned by
KK Birla. But there was another special set of people – Kayan’s thick-asthieves business associates: AS Thiyagarajan and Ramesh Kumar of
Citibank, Hemendra Kothari, president of the BSE and owner of broking
firm DS Purbhoodas. These men formed an informal cartel, working closely
with four firms controlled by Kayan and his partner, Utsav Parekh.
Of these four, C Mackertich & Co, the key outfit, directly owned by
Kayan, used to dominate the government securities business. That was
before Harshad Mehta snatched away that mantle by roping in SBI and
BankAm, cranking up megadeals in 1991.
These would be absolutely unknown names to lay investors, at least
compared to names like Mazda Industries and Growmore. And Kayan would
be a non-entity beside Harshad’s popular image. But Kayan, a low-profile,
wily operator then in his mid-thirties, was a much bigger force in the broking
business. Like Harshad Mehta, he straddled all segments of the financial
markets – units, PSU bonds, government securities and shares. Like
Harshad, he played huge stakes in all these markets. Like Harshad, he had
strong views on the market and was willing to bet on them. And, like
Harshad, he was intelligent and able to construct complicated deals.
But there were vital differences. Kayan, who alternates his charming smile
with an unsettling hard, penetrating look, was publicity shy and cool.
Harshad was loud and brash. Kayan was mild and preferred to hang on to the
coat tails of institutions. Harshad was willing to stake money on his own

account. Kayan’s office was fitted with ordinary grey laminates. Harshad’s
office was all glitzy glass, marble and chrome. Kayan dressed simply and
spoke diffidently. Harshad wore double-breasted suits and drove around in
his Toyota Lexus. Kayan was a behind-the-scenes operator. Harshad was
gregarious and a charmer. Besides all this, there was another very big
difference. Harshad was the Big Bull and Kayan was a bear. They were
locked in a bloody war, a war that was the genesis of the scam.
It was not surprising that the Big Bull was missing at Kayan’s housewarming party. Indeed, his brother Ashwin was supposed to attend but his
wife just had a baby. But even if he had gone, he would have been seen as a
representative of the enemy camp. The enmity had gone too far. Behind the
celebrations, some guests were keenly aware that Kayan had reasons to be
worried. Defying all his calculations, the stock market was booming. That
was bad news for the bears. The bulls were making a killing.
The bull camp was led by the optimists – Harshad along with Nemish
Shah, Pallav Sheth and other smaller bulls. They held a very rosy view of the
future, arguing that the Indian economy was set for a major turnaround. The
government was about to jettison the control regime of the past, unleashing
new entrepreneurial forces. Past performances mattered little in the new fastchanging context. This view propelled the bulls to kick up prices, often with
the connivance of managements. They were indirectly supported by the
mutual funds which, with cash raised from the public, were going around
with a big shopping bag. Later, the booming market caught the lay investors’
fancy and they emerged as the vast silent majority, unwittingly supporting
the bulls. Sounds like recent memory? We just saw a sequel in 1999-2000.
The bear cartel was an equally formidable force. They were small in
number, a minority against the bull camp, but had seasoned, well established
players. Aggarwala knew the business inside out and was capable of striking
big deals with foreign banks. Kayan was the most powerful securities trader
at one time. Manu Manek was like a parallel stock exchange with a nationwide link-up, supplying shares in bulk to anybody who had difficulty in
delivering. This camp depended on the support of the stock exchange, which
they thought was their rightful fiefdom. The bulls were the Johnny-comelately. The bear cartel was mostly part of the old establishment.

The cartel members were all-powerful people, each bringing to the table
some specific contribution. DS Purbhoodas, owned by Kothari, was the only
broker with a hotline to UTI at the time when MJ Pherwani was chairman.
Less fortunate brokers say that UTI would often sell to bail out the cartel
members if they were trapped due to short-selling. Indeed, for the bear
cartel, getting UTI to react the way it wanted it to was critical. After all, till
1990, if UTI sneezed, the market caught a cold.
Pherwani never liked Harshad and UTI was, therefore, closed to him.
Pherwani had, in fact, blacklisted him. But Harshad, the consum-mate
salesman, refused to give up. On a morning walk with Pherwani on Juhu
beach, he expressed his anger and frustration.

“You are the only organisation that is not doing business with me”, said
Harshad.

“I can’t do much, can I?” replied Pherwani.
“It is seen as my failure. I can’t get over it. What is lacking in us? Nobody
else refuses to deal with us except UTI.” Harshad pleaded with him and
Pherwani relented.
Harshad got him to agree to some transactions but they were never carried
out. The Mehtas felt that the establishment’s reach went very deep. Equity
brokerage for UTI was a coveted business restricted to a few. “There was
tremendous jealousy about anybody else muscling in”, said one of Harshad’s
brothers. After much protest from other brokers, UTI gave hotlines to others
too. Their phones, however, rang less often than Kothari’s.
Even after SA Dave took over the chairmanship of UTI, the situation
changed only a little (though the approved brokers’ list was expanded
considerably and many more got hotlines) because the cartel had links with
the dealers and very senior officials in UTI operating just under the
chairman. Dave had an open mind about Harshad. When the BSE sensitive
index crossed the 2000 level, he rang Harshad to congratulate him.
Nevertheless, Harshad got very little business. Sometime in late 1991,
Harshad got Dave and senior UTI officials to look at a presentation by the
Growmore research team. Still no business.

In fact, UTI executives even played nasty tricks with Harshad, according
to the Mehtas. In 1991, a Growmore dealer took a money market deal with
BankAm to UTI. The idea was to lend money against 13% public sector
bonds held by UTI and take back the same money on call. UTI executives
took down the details with a promise to get back to Growmore. They never
called through the day. At 4.30 in the afternoon, UTI informed the
Growmore dealer that the chairman had taken a decision. The deal wasn’t
going through. The deal went to a cartel member, claimed the Mehtas.
Apart from UTI, the crucial institution backing the cartel was Citibank,
the most aggressive and intelligent trading bank. Kayan’s
C Mackertich was a close ally, almost like a house broker for Citibank, say
his rivals. Citibank’s treasury chief told his dealers to put through any deal
Kayan brought, declaring, “he is part of the bank.” The bank did not deny
this but insisted that it had got very good deals out of these brokers and that
they had been very loyal to the bank. As the Janakiraman Committee found
out, two of the top three brokers of Citibank were C Mackertich and Stewart
& Co. Like UTI, many brokers and banks were shut out of Citibank’s deals.
Citibank’s link with Kayan was part of a wider business chain that
included Aditya Birla and Kothari. When Birla’s Grasim Industries went for
a foreign equity issue, the lead managers were Merrill Lynch and
surprisingly, Citibank, which is a minor league player compared to Merrill.
Merrill’s Indian partner of Merrill was DSP Financial Consultants, owned by
Kothari. Kayan and his partner Utsav Parekh, were the leading brokers for
virtually all the Birlas. Kayan was also acting on behalf of a key executive of
the KK Birla empire, Ramesh Maheshwari. The board of BK Birla’s Birla
Century Portfolio Manage-ment Ltd. included Utsav Parekh.
Aditya Birla, BK Birla’s son, was openly bearish, labelling the market
boom as irrational. Amazingly for a businessman, he sent a dossier to many
opinion makers drawing comparisons between the low price-earnings ratio
of Unilever and Reckitt & Colman quoted on the London Stock Exchange
and very high P/E of Hindustan Lever and Reckitt and Colman quoted on
BSE, to prove that Indian scrips were overpriced.
The cartel, mainly C Mackertich, enjoyed a strange relationship with
Citibank (probably Kothari who was close to AS Thiyagarajan, Citibank’s

chief of investment banking, who introduced Ajay Kayan to Citibank). And
they had firm control over Canara Bank, Canbank Financial Services and
Canbank Mutual for stock market operations. This baffled and infuriated
other brokers. Thiyagarajan’s brothers, AS Murthy and AS Nagrajan, ran a
broking firm in Bangalore called Megastocks which “virtually ran like the
Bangalore branch of
C Mackertich”, says one Calcutta broker. By Thiyagarajan’s own admission,
some 30% of its transactions have been with C Mackertich and Stewart and
Co. This arrangement was convenient for all. Since Canfina had its
headquarters in Bangalore, Kayan needed a local broker there. So did
Citibank, for its deals with Canfina, though, for obvious reasons, it did not
deal directly with Megastocks.
Kayan’s relationship with Canfina and Citibank was very close. When a
finance company did a small direct deal with Canfina, Kayan called up the
dealer.

“So, you have started dealing with Canfina these days”, said Kayan.
“It is small deal of Rs 5 crore. But how do you know?” asked the
surprised dealer.
Kayan laughed. “I get to know anything Canfina does.” The dealer took it
as a message to stay off Canfina.
Publicly, of course, Kayan made a spirited defence of his close links with
Citibank, Canfina and CanMutual. “These institutions are run by
performance-driven people. They have excellent dealers. They chose to deal
with me because my dealings are fair and reasonable. They can’t say we
have harmed them.” That’s what all operators say.
But it harmed others. One big securities broker based in Bombay simply
could not get the Bangalore-based Canfina executive director, MK Ashok
Kumar, on the line. “If you called Bangalore they said he would be in
Bombay on a particular day and will meet you then”, recalls this broker.
Once in Bombay, Ashok Kumar would be untraceable. Some trading banks,
too, found it as difficult to deal with Canfina. It mattered. Canfina had

picked up thousands of crores of bonds. “You had to deal with Canfina”,
says the frustrated broker.
These were the players on one side and on the other side stood Harshad.
By 1990, the battle lines were drawn – the pedigreed cartel versus the upstart
Harshad who had regular dealings with Canfina, Grindlays and BankAm
(top three traders) but not Citibank, the biggest of all. On one side were the
bulls with no definite financial backing and on the other, an established
cartel with institutional support. Their first battleground was the money
market where Harshad had come up fighting against the same cartel, leaving
them wounded. The next and final battleground was the stock exchanges.
Recounts Harshad: “In 1990 and 1991 we saw a great deal of volatility in
money markets. The average interest cost was 19.5%. You cannot borrow at
that rate to put into 13% and 9% tax-free bonds. Units were yielding 16%.
So, you had to change your base security. We went to equities. I was bullish
while the cartel played bear. Kothari openly declared himself to be a bear in
early 1992. His money market losses hurt his ego. ‘Who the hell is this
fellow?’ he thought about me.” Each member of the cartel privately
expressed extreme hatred for Harshad but publicly maintained that they were
no chest-pounding bears and that there was no fight.
Until May 1990, the market was stagnant – the Bombay sensitive index
was at 700-800. But soon thereafter it started inching up, moving up more
and more rapidly as weeks wore on. On 2 nd August, Iraq invaded Kuwait.
The market was unconcerned, hitting 1602 on 9 th October. But that was the
peak. The boom fizzled out even more rapidly – in forty-five days flat the
index fell to a bottom of 956 on 25 th January 1991, just after the Gulf war
started. In only seven months, the index had zoomed up by 100% and slid by
80%. Those seven months were an indicator of the sharper swings to come.
It left the players further divided.
On one side of the great divide were the bears who believed that 12001500 was the natural market level while on the other side were the bulls who
felt that at 1000, the index was at its rock bottom. The bulls proved right.
From the index level of 956, the stock market fizz began leading to a
phenomenal boom. In June, Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated just before the

parliamentary elections. This created political uncertainty, which is the worst
enemy of business. It didn’t matter to the stock markets though. By the end
of the year, the market had taken off like a rocket, riding on the “liberal”
economic policies of the Narasimha Rao government.
By 22 nd April, the day before the scam story broke, the index had
touched 4467, a rise of 375% or an eye-popping 321% on an annualised
basis. In some counters, Harshad’s favourites like Apollo Tyres, the jump
was an obscene ten times. This was a spectacular new pheno-menon. It
stunned market players out of their wits, since the market was used to swings
of up to a maximum of 40% between a bull and a bear phase. Exactly the
same phenomenon would be repeated in 1999-2000.
So, if the bears thought that the market’s natural level was 1200, a 40%
rise above that or an index of 1600 was the time for them to press the sell
button. They did. From the middle of 1991, the cartel and Mehta were face
to face in the stock market. In May 1991, when the index was poised to race
through 1300, the bears went on a hammering spree. In the brawl between
the bulls and the bears, the mutual funds, especially CanMutual, obliged by
“opening up its portfolio to the bears”, charged Ashwin. According to one
report, CanMutual sold 13 lakh shares of Apollo Tyres at a Rs 66-72 range.
In three months, the price had gone up to Rs 230. Though Citibank would
not confirm or deny it, it too partially liquidated its portfolio, believing that
it was a great time to sell. Ironically, the same sellers changed their views at
a higher level, chasing the stocks they had earlier sold. Citibank claimed that
it merely bought and sold shares as part of normal trading strategy and never
took an open bear position.
Mehta was the Big Bull, using his position in the money markets to buy
Apollo, ACC and other scrips, backed by amazing personal hype. On the
other side, at various points the cartel members had been short on ACC and
Apollo Tyres, the Big Bull’s two favorites. One prominent Calcutta based
broker recalled that in an early January party in Calcutta, Kayan and his men
were asserting that the cement industry had peaked.

“Cement stocks are not moving”, said Ajay “I have just spoken to Mysore
Cements (a Birla company). ACC is only Harshad’s doing.” It was above Rs
3000 that day. Some 15 days later, this broker attended another dinner in

Calcutta where Harsh Himatsingka, working for C Mackertich, again
asserted that ACC would go down. Instead, ACC simply doubled. The bulls
were tooting their horns.
According to one account, Kayan was playing bear in many scrips till late
1991. He was perhaps the hired gun for Citibank in its battle with Harshad
Mehta. Kayan was, of course, bullish in several other scrips most notably the
fertiliser shares of Gujarat Narmada Fertilizer Corporation and Southern
Petrochemicals Industries Corporation and power companies like CESC Ltd.
In April 1992, he pledged a part of these scrips and raised about Rs 6 crore
from Peerless Finance. Rumours are that one member of the cartel squared
up 3 lakh shares of ACC when the price touched Rs 3000 – a total of Rs 90
crore. Contrast that with Mehta’s move: 26 lakh Apollo Tyres shares bought
at Rs 30, pulling the price up to Rs 400. Who paid for it? One member of the
cartel was short by 30 lakh shares in Apollo before the Budget. He squared
up at Rs 275 against his selling price of Rs 150.
The more the bears sold, the more the market shot up. In one of its last
ditch efforts, the bears slammed again in November and December 1991.
But Harshad hit back to near-finality. “This was a classic Harshad move”,
claimed Ashwin. All through late November and December, Harshad gave
the impression that he had exhausted himself. He was low-key, listless and
showed little sign of fighting back. Then, in January, when the market
opened, Harshad went in for the kill. He ordered massive and continuous
buying of all his favourite scrips in all exchanges, mercilessly pummeling
the bear operators. That was the end of the bear resistance. Kayan boldly
defended his decision to sell. “When we said this is the right time to book
profits, some others didn’t like it. If Harshad wanted everybody to speak in
his language how can I help it?” This is legitimate but sounds too rational.
After all, the run-ins that the cartel and Harshad were having were not a
straightforward battle of wisdom about the course of the market. Both parties
went looking for weapons outside the trading floor.
Harshad was wooing corporate clients like Apollo, Mazda, Blow Plast and
Gujarat Ambuja in a big way, buying large chunks of these stocks to push up
their prices. Other companies had their own favourite brokers. ITC had
Pallav Sheth while Rajendra Banthia was bullish in Bombay Dyeing. The

newly emerged bull camp had struck deals with the corporate sector for
funds to form their own informal cartel.
While Harshad was diverting cash from the money markets and joining
hands with the corporate sector, the bears would normally have had three
weapons. The first was using the governing boards of stock exchanges to fix
settlement prices, the second was to get big mutual funds, mainly UTI, to
sell and the third was to get authorities like RBI and ministry of finance to
order selling by the investment institutions which were all governmentowned. Indeed, the RBI governor called a meeting of all these institutions on
10 th March, and indirectly asked them to sell. But more about that in the
next chapter. Let’s look at the price-fixing mechanism first.
In the BSE (the president then was Hemendra Kothari who had been
screaming that the market was overheated) the making up charges (or
hawala price that the seller pays the buyer) of settlement No.22 were as
much as 15% less than the market rates for several scrips. In Calcutta, where
the governing board was dominated by men like Sewantilal Shah of Stewart
& Co. the settlement price on ACC in April 1992 was just 7600 when the
market price was 9500. The margin money set on ACC for the settlement 24
of 91/92 for the period ending 4 th April 1992, was Rs 1500 for buying and
Rs 1000 on selling, clearly letting off the short-sellers easily.
The bulls were, however, paying higher margins. While the hawala rate
for the ACC scrip between this period increased by 125% (from Rs 3700 to
Rs 8350), margins payable by buyers increased by 400%. At the same time,
jobbers refused to accept offers to square up at higher levels. It seemed that
the idea was to block the bull funds by making them pay on the spot.
It was the third weapon that failed to work. The cartel may have attempted
to repeat its old trick, that is, ride with the institutional wave in general and
get some mutual funds to sell. “Earlier UTI could make or mar the market”,
according to a Calcutta-based broker. But the cartel, it appears, failed to
reckon with the true, endless supply of banking system’s money that
Harshad could summon with which he was swallowing large deliveries as
easily as mid-morning snacks.

Ultimately it was a battle of egos. “The cartel’s dominance was now gone.
Harshad had made the bear cartel appear foolish in their forecast that the
market was overheated. It hurt them”, said Ashwin who was personally
against the fight-to-finish war Harshad was waging. There were some moves
for reconciling the two camps. Harsh Himatsingka and Vivek Mundhra, who
also worked for Kayan in Calcutta, even came down to Bombay and tried to
make peace. The two sides almost agreed on a truce but Kothari was
unrelenting.
Through the boom, Kothari continued to use his public position as the
BSE president to caution investors about the stock bubble. In fact, he was so
incensed that he called Harshad and Ashwin and told them to behave. “I can
stop you from operating in any stock exchange”, he warned Ashwin. On 3 rd
April 1992, after he had just stepped down from his one-year term as the
president of BSE, he told The Economic Times that the BSE index was
already too high and that investors should stay away. He pointed out, quite
correctly, that even near-bankrupt companies were being quoted at
unrealistically high prices. The only person who could have stopped this
bloody war was Ashok Kumar of Canfina, who was close to both Kayan and
Harshad. He was counselling Kayan to cool down and asking Harshad to go
slow. He spoke to Kothari too. But the war continued.
By March 1992, it was clear that the bears had been severely mauled.
According to Ashwin, they had by then changed their position and were
turning bullish, leaving Harshad a dubious victor in a senseless war. But
Harshad’s win was also his loss. He lost balance and ended up being the
villain in the greatest scam ever. By then he was alone. The other bulls had
virtually withdrawn from the game.
As for the bear cartel, it got out of the problem comfortably thanks to its
nexus with the Canfina and Citibank. “Their losses have been parked in the
PMS accounts of Citibank”, said Harshad. For instance, in April, Citibank
gave away Rs 89 crore of profits to its house brokers, C Mackertich and
Stewart & Co. by selling mutual funds units at artificially low rates which
the two brokers then resold at very high profits. It did not hurt Citibank. The
money belonged to its PMS clients. Besides, a part of the Standard Chartered
Bank funds may have landed up with the cartel through Hiten Dalal. Naresh

Aggarwala, who was never close to Citibank, found his own means to fund
his losses.
But after all this mayhem, Harshad was unrepentant. “A lot of responsible
people said that I was rigging the prices”, he said in late September 1992.
“How could I do that? I had invested just around
Rs 500-600 crore. Even the smallest mutual fund in the market had an
investible fund of more than Rs 1000 crore. I was a big individual player but
still small by market standards. The point is, everybody was buying. At the
index level of 1100, some people said, this is it. We have reached the peak.
They were wrong. Then we reached 1800. This time everybody said there is
no way the prices can move up anymore. Everybody was bearish.” In any
case, Harshad was fighting a deadly duel, by his own admission. “Either you
kill or you get killed”, is how he described the battle later.
Harshad lost control over the steering and crashed. Kayan told Frontline
magazine in September 1992 that he thought Harshad was a “delinquent
juvenile. Had he been a little more mature he wouldn’t have to suffer such
trauma.” This is partly true. Harshad’s need for hundreds of crores forced
him to play with bigger and bigger sums of money while wearing his success
on his sleeve. He attracted more and more attention to himself. It was easy
for the bear cartel to divert attention to him as the prime reason for the
unreasonable bull market.
That attention was Harshad’s death warrant. It got the RBI governor on
his trail. Once that happened, Harshad had no chance of escape.

Chapter 7
Harshad in the Net
The irony was that
whereas RBI and its
subsidiary, SBI,
should have been
taking credit jointly
for having taken the
lid off the scam, one
was cornering all the
credit while the other
was humiliated and
accused.

WHO caught Harshad Mehta with his hand deep in State Bank of India’s
cashbox? The question is very simple but not the answer. Like the six blind
men describing an elephant, in this case there were three partially blind men
– the Income Tax department, Reserve Bank of India and SBI. The animal:
the metaphoric Big Bull.
The first chapter describes how SBI officials uncovered the case of the
missing securities, how Sitaraman was nabbed and the fraud came to light.
Unknown to the well-meaning CL Khemani and RL Kamat of SBI, the
governor of RBI too was doing his own sleuthing. When politicians started
baying for his blood a month after the scam story broke out, he would claim:
“I caught the thief.”
Passions ran very high at Madhuban, the high-rise building stone’s throw
away from the SBI head office, where its senior officials live. They believed
that the RBI governor was squarely responsible for the mindless CBI assault
on the homes of SBI officials and particularly for the sad plight of Khemani.
This may or may not be without basis. But the great irony is that whereas

RBI and its 97%-owned subsidiary, SBI, should have been jointly
investigating the scam, the latter was humiliated and dumped in the dock.
So what was RBI governor S Venkitaramanan’s claim to fame? If you
believe the sequence of events he traces, RBI knew, investigated and
handcuffed the guilty. The story began in 1991 with a few small banks. The
tale got linked to Harshad at a later stage – only in March 1992.
Venkitaramanan was installed as the governor of RBI on 22 nd December
1990 by the then Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar. The appointment was
part of a deal struck by the Shekhar government with a powerful business
house, which had reasons to be beholden to Venkitaramanan. For
Venkitaramanan, who was the union finance secretary between 1986 and
1988, this brought a long-standing dream to reality. It also gave RBI a
chance to reform itself after successive governors had turned it bureaucratic
and insular. Venkitaramanan was perhaps the first governor who was, unlike
the earlier three (including then finance minister Manmohan Singh), keen on
listening to the market. But the market was far from his mind on 22 nd
December.
Two weeks after he sat in the governor’s chair at RBI, India was close to a
default on foreign loans. The foreign exchange reserves were down to just
US $ 1.1 billion or two weeks of imports. The governor mounted a strong
rescue package, like selling gold and putting a draconian credit squeeze on
importers. It was a critical battle to retrieve the creditworthiness of a
rudderless country. The battle was marshalled by Venkitaramanan. Of
course, the crisis was created by the excessive short-term borrowing made
by the Rajiv Gandhi government, of which Venkitaramanan was a key
member.
The governor, while making his repeated trips to Washington, London and
other places, scrounging around for money, was also looking into something
as innocuous as BRs – the small slips of paper on which thousands of crores
worth of business was done. In March 1991, the governor received a tip that
BRs were being misused in the money market, that banks were issuing BRs
without actually holding securities. This led to a fraudulent generation of
credit by banks on behalf of their broker-clients. Exactly three months after
he took over, the governor asked for an investigation into five such banks.

In an instruction of 20 th March, marked “top secret” he ordered the
Department of Banking Operations and Development to inspect the
securities department of the United Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Bank of
India, Canara Bank and the Indian Bank. Curiously, under this list (which he
called “illustrative”) the governor scrawled: “While foreign banks are also
involved we have to take care.” It was almost an afterthought and became a
topic of intense debate later. Was Venkitaramanan trying to protect certain
foreign banks? Or was he being extra cautious in view of India’s dependence
on loans arranged by those banks?
The irony is that RBI’s vaults were full of inspection reports on precisely
this, i.e. suspicious money market operations dating as far back as 1986. The
governor or the deputy governor, Amitav Ghosh, just had to look into their
own backyard. At least half a dozen inspection reports had openly named the
Bank of Karad, Vijaya Bank, the Syndicate Bank, Andhra Bank, Citibank
and others as being involved. But instead of picking up the threads from
there, RBI went in for a fresh investigation under the orders of
Venkitaramanan. Amitav Ghosh either forgot about the earlier inspection
reports or pretended that they did not exist.
RBI inspections are long-drawn affairs – even in cases of suspected fraud.
After the investigation files came back to RBI, another two months passed
during which RBI inspectors had scrutinised twelve public sector banks. The
reports pointed out the misuse of BRs and rampant deals at artificial rates
and recommended issuing guidelines to stop such practices. The bank that
was at the centre of the BR scam in 1991, as discovered by RBI inspectors,
was the Bank of Karad. Meanwhile, in June 1991, the RBI investigated three
banks that financed or routed brokers: the Bank of Madura, the Bank of
Karad and Andhra Bank. Incidentally, the files went to the deputy governor,
Amitav Ghosh. He sat on them for almost two months.
What were his arguments? “Let there be an audit”, said Ghosh to the
governor. This suggestion betrayed his lack of faith in his own inspection
team. Ghosh wanted an audit done by the chartered accountant firm, Bansi
Mehta, later found to be either auditor or director of scam-tainted institutions
like Fairgrowth, Canbank Financial Services, Canbank Mutual and several
companies of Bhupen Dalal. Ghosh also wanted RBI to investigate the
United Commercial Bank, presumably to buy time and deflect attention.

The governor apparently disagreed. “We will be inviting adverse comment
if we do not issue instructions immediately to stop these malpractices”, he
wrote to Ghosh on 23 rd July. “I am worried that even after I had pointed this
out as early as 20 th March 1991, no deterrent action has been taken so far.
The draft instructions may be kept ready for issue on 26-7-91. RBI has to act
quicker in these matters.” A few days after that, on 26 th July, Ghosh issued
the circular that laid down the parameters for the use of BRs. That was a full
two months after RBI inspectors had indicted the Bank of Karad – enough
time for the brokers, directors and employees connected with Karad to cover
up.
Of course, as subsequent events have proved, everybody simply ignored
Ghosh’s guidelines. There is no evidence to prove that Ghosh made an
attempt to enforce the circular that was signed by him. In fact, the banks
gave elaborate replies to the circular. This included SBI and Standard
Chartered Bank, where violations were rampant. Stanchart’s case was almost
hilarious. It was engaged in a vigorous correspondence with RBI, writing
three letters on 26 th August, 4 th September and 20 th December, asking for
clarifications and asserting that it was religiously following the circular. As
proof of compliance, it even attached to the letter, copies of its watertight
control instructions!
Its 4 th September letter, signed by chief executive Pesi Nat, asserted that
“We do not undertake buy-back deals in government securities at rates other
than the market rate...we do not issue SGL (subsidiary general ledger) forms
against bank receipt holdings.” Then, the self-certification reaches its
climax: “As regards transactions by us through brokers, our policy is
particularly conservative...We do not maintain broker accounts at all...
Lastly, our transactions in the inter-bank market are purely for our own
statutory/trading purpose and we do not act as agents for any brokerclients...” All this, of course, turned out to be completely false.
RBI left the matter at that, even though by December, fifty-one banks had
declared that they were complying with the circular and twenty-four of them
had sent investment policies and procedures to RBI. But a month before that,
an incident took place which may have seemed innocuous then. RBI had put
KK Mukherjee on the job of inspecting the SBI, though not its securities

transactions specifically. He produced a management report. Mukherjee, an
abrasive but extremely competent officer, made comments on the Indian
dollar account of the SBI. The SBI chairman disagreed with Mukherjee. But
that wasn’t the important part.
Mukherjee’s report suggested the creation of a “backup department in SBI
for monitoring whether the securities transactions of the bank were in
accordance with the RBI guidelines and those of the SBI central office.” His
recommendation, if properly followed up, would have split Sitaraman’s
function and made him more accountable. But Mukherjee didn’t look into
the use of BRs and SGLs. Why not? Perhaps nobody’s suspicion was
aroused then. The governor’s explanation was that SBI was then involved in
marketing the India Development Bonds which were designed to channel
money from abroad. IDBs were a critical means of boosting foreign
exchange reserves and RBI felt it would be unwise to do any investigation
that would affect the morale of SBI staff.
That one comment of Mukherjee’s, on the flawed system of the SBI, is
important in the scam history. It was the first time that the RBI had an
opportunity to gain an entry into Harshad Mehta’s dealings with SBI but
unwittingly let that chance go. The next opportunity would arise three
months later. And not due to RBI’s own efforts.
While RBI was looking into banking practices, Harshad had emerged as a
rampaging bull in, wrecking conventional wisdom about values and prices of
shares. But his influence was limited. While it was easy for him to snakecharm stock prices, leaving his rivals agape, Harshad was unknown in the
centre of power, New Delhi. In late 1991, the Mehtas decided that they
needed to improve their links with the government. “We were looking for an
entry into New Delhi”, says Harshad. The Mehtas were acutely aware that
brokers did not enjoy a respectable reputation. “I did not want to be seen as
another broker from Bombay. We wanted to position ourselves as
knowledge-able and best placed in capital and money markets. Our
presentation was our entry pass.”
As part of his strategy to improve his “liaison”, Harshad zeroed in on
Krishnamurthy. It was the right choice. Krishnamurthy was unique. He was a
successful bureaucrat (having been industries secretary) and a well-known

industrial manager having headed the public sector giants, Bharat Heavy
Electricals, Maruti Udyog and Steel Authority. He was also a businessman in
his own right, controlling, along with his two sons, a smallish industrial
empire in India and overseas. Finally, as someone close to Rajiv Gandhi and
a small section of the Congress, he was also an aspiring politician.
Harshad requested businessman SN Chaturvedi (who was very close to a
section of the Congress and had aspirations of keeping one firm foot in
politics) to introduce him to Krishnamurthy. Since Chaturvedi was close to
Ghulam Nabi Azad, an important fund-raiser and Congress leader, this later
became a juicy piece of gossip in Delhi. Harshad has a plausible
explanation: “You need that introduction. That’s the culture in Delhi.
Nothing works without a reference. I would not have been able to get past
even the durwan in North Block.”
On 18 th February, Harshad Mehta met Krishnamurthy at Yojana Bhavan
in Delhi and impressed him immensely with his lethal combination of catchy
investment theories and his high-pressure sales talk. Harshad started off by
saying that “if you continue to throw away the public sector shares for a
song, the government will fall.” He suggested that a disinvestment panel,
headed by Krishnamurthy, should package the deal attractively and redeem
the public sector undertaking debt through a debt-equity swap.
Krishnamurthy was impressed. “I learned more about the capital markets
in those meetings than I did in my lifetime”, he was later quoted as saying.
This was partly so because he simply had no understanding of stock markets.
Harshad dazzled him by saying, “Capital markets can solve all our main
problems: unemployment, resource crunch, inflation, etc.” Krishnamurthy
was also keen to know why the ACC shares had reached Rs 10,000. And that
if ACC was quoted so high what the Cement Corporation of India should be
quoted at.
Later Krishnamurthy would say, “Here was a man who was lionised by
the press as the brightest young thing in finance. He came to see me and I
received him as I do others who have ideas to share on resolving the
country’s economic problems. It is my job to be open to ideas and
information. Mehta came and told me that he had concrete ideas on solving
the country’s balance of payments problems. I told him I am not the best

man to deal with these as the implementation was in the hands of the finance
ministry. When I realised that the purpose of his visit was to discuss
resources, I directed him first to my colleague Dr C Rangarajan. He said he
was busy and suggested that Mehta meet the finance secretary. All I did was
telephone the finance secretary that Mehta wanted to see him.
Geethakrishnan gave him an appointment.”
Mehta, along with Jitu Shroff of VB Desai and Co. made a twenty-minute
presentation on how the capital market could be opened up to attract funds.
He also made the point that it was private organisations like Merrill Lynch
which today had more to invest than financial institutions or even
multilateral funding agencies like the Asian Development Bank or the
International Monetary Fund/World Bank with whom India was engaged in a
painful negotiation for a few hundred million dollars.
Krishnamurthy and Harshad hit it off so well that their relationship
quickly spilled over to business deals. Harshad registered Growmore Power
Corporation with Rs 1000 crore of authorised capital, presum-ably to tap
Krishnamurthy’s general management experience in running large
corporations and specific experience in running BHEL. But more
controversially, Harshad also gave him money without any collateral, a
transaction that the CBI labelled a bribe in an attempt to fix Krishnamurthy.
Ashwin said that Krishnamurthy’s “son called us and said that they need
between Rs 35 lakh to Rs 75 lakh to buy more shares in India Meters. We
sent instructions to Mohan Khandelwal of our Delhi office to release up to
Rs 35 lakh.” The Delhi office eventually handed over a cheque of 32.74 lakh
without working out the interest, agreement or collateral. To help someone
with an instant loan without proper documentation is not unusual among
businessmen. “Harshad would give money to anybody”, said Ashwin. “Our
mental limit was Rs 20 lakh”. But to some the figure of Rs 32.74 lakh
looked suspiciously like the exact rupee value of US $100,000 at that time.
All this while, the stock market continued to boom and the money market
remained turbulent with the banks merrily flouting the 26 th July circular. In
January 1992, the governor was once again tipped off by a securities dealer
about the rampant misuse of BRs. RBI chose to investigate three banks:
Andhra Bank, Bank of Karad and Bank of Madura. The reports reached RBI

in the middle of February. They showed massive irregularities in securities
transactions. The banks had continued to lend their names to fictitious deals.
Some DBOD officials suggested that the job of inspecting broker’s books
be handed over to outside investigative agencies like the CBI or the
Department of Revenue Intelligence. But this was too radical an idea for the
RBI, where the tradition is to pretend that brokers do not exist, or at best, are
necessary evils. One of the executive directors, Vimla Vishvanathan, living
up to this tradition, opposed the idea of getting the CBI in. She also
suggested, in a note dated 22 nd February, that “the governor may like to take
the opportunity to discuss this with the bank chairmen after the next credit
policy meeting...before that, the issues may be discussed at a top
management meeting.”
The governor was aware of Vishvanathan’s legendary slowness in taking
action on anything. So when the note reached him on 3 rd March he noted:
“There is no need to discuss further. We have to take action to prevent this
kind of abuse. We have to remove the directors who have shown
involvement in this. Bank of Karad should be asked to take action to stop
this kind of abuse. May (I) have an idea of what powers we have to take
action? I would like to issue clear instructions threatening withdrawal of
licenses in cases of such open defiance of orders. Banks are benefiting
brokers through fake transactions. Please discuss.”
The next discussion took place on 12 th March, between the chief officer
of the DBOD, ND Parameshwaran, Vishvanathan and the governor. The
governor recalls having suggested a takeover of Bank of Karad.
Vishvanathan said that under a section of the BR Act, the RBI could act
against erring banks but argued against it saying that a take-over would lead
to all kinds of speculation. “Let’s not disturb the banking system right now.
We will take up the matter in the credit policy meetings with the banks”, she
said. The governor made the fatal mistake of giving in to Vishvanathan’s
arguments.
She went back and wrote: “The governor said that while we need not take
any extreme steps immediately, a strong and final warning should be given
to the 3 banks about the possibility of various consequences if they persist in

contravening our instructions...The irregularities observed in the scrutiny
conducted in the three banks should be communicated to them. We should
seek the chairman’s written confirmation that these irregularities will not
recur and they will ensure strict compliance with our July 1991 circular.”
Karad was again let off and the governor, by allowing Vishvanathan to put
words in his mouth, laid himself exposed to the charge of dereliction, after
having started the whole process of investigation.
As the governor was pursuing the Bank of Karad issue, he was taking a
close took at the Harshad phenomenon. “There was no money in the system,
the borrowers were starved of credit and here was one broker buying shares
by the crores? I was curious”, he said. “Where was Harshad getting his
money from?” This was the first time the investigation into the money
market scam (misuse of BRs by the Bank of Karad, etc.) and the stock
market scam converged, in the office of the RBI governor, an office that has
traditionally been an ivory tower in the murky world of Indian finance. But
Venkitaramanan himself was scarcely aware of that convergence.
He became aware, following the leads thrown up by the much publicized
Income Tax raid of 28 th February – one day before the Budget – at the
prodding of a top office bearer of the BSE. The Budget was one of the most
significant in Indian economic history. Its pro-liberalisation policies were
used by the bulls to send the stock prices shooting. Even the finance minister
felt that the stock boom was a result of the liberal policies and statements of
intent in his Budget speech.
The Income Tax department wasn’t impressed. Some of the officials,
inspired by one of Harshad’s rival brokers, were curious about the rise of
Harshad Mehta. Harshad himself fuelled this curiosity. The cover stories in
the February issues of Business India and Business Today celebrated
Harshad’s flashy cars, opulent seafront apartment and the huge numbers that
he was playing around with. Intrigued, the Income Tax department planned a
massive raid on him.
The raid and subsequent investigation was conducted by
CP Ramaswami, an upright and dogged deputy director (investigation), in
his early forties. But, while integrity was essential, it was not enough.
Harshad had computerised everything and officials had to break through

computer codes to gain access to critical records. They drafted in a computer
expert to break the codes but that too, took months.
Still, the Income Tax department gave RBI several crucial tips. One was
that huge amounts of money were coming in from Madras. The money, it
was rumoured, belonged to a top political leader of Tamil Nadu. The
governor ordered SBI to monitor Harshad Mehta’s current account at the
Bombay main branch where Sitaraman was then working as a junior officer
in the investment department. More about that later.
In early March 1992, these disparate strands of the scam began running
parallel to each other. RBI’s investigation into Karad and other banks for the
misuse of BRs in money markets, the Income Tax department’s curiosity
about Harshad’s rise in the stock markets, and his deepening links with
Krishnamurthy. Among all these, what captured the public imagination most
and was uppermost in the mind of the RBI governor was the booming stock
market and Harshad’s source of money.
Venkitaramanan took a personal interest in the stock market boom and
wanted it to be contained at any cost. He genuinely believed that the boom
was a speculative bubble that was distorting money supply and the flow of
credit to where it was needed more: cash-starved Indian businessmen. Was
he also egged on by somebody? It is difficult to say but one of the frequent
visitors to his huge bungalow in the posh Cumballa Hills area that year used
to be Hemendra Kothari, President of the BSE. Did Kothari, by then known
as an open Harshad-baiter, advise the governor to investigate Harshad’s
source of funds? They were certainly close.
In 1986, Unit Trust of India launched its first offshore mutual funds with
Merrill Lynch which had a collaboration with DSP Financial Consultants,
controlled by Kothari. As DSP was catapulted on to the international arena,
riding piggyback on Merrill Lynch, big business-men smelt new moneymaking opportunities. Hoping that there would be more offshore funds from
India, including private funds and huge commercial borrowings, the
Hindujas approached Merrill Lynch in India through its Swiss-based
investment banking firm, Amas Holdings, which had joint ventures and
operations in several parts of the world.

The Hindujas knew Venkitaramanan, then finance secretary, very well. So
did Kothari, who used to meet him through Piyush Mankad, an IAS officer
then with the investment division of the Finance Ministry. In one of his visits
to India, Michael Von Clemm, managing director of Merrill Lynch, told
Venkitaramanan that the Hindujas wanted to be their partners in India and
that he wanted his advice. The governor pointed out that Kothari ran a small
business and if he was providing the right services, Merrill should help
people like him grow rather than have him muscled out by a big business
house.
On 9 th March, the governor made a trip to Hyderabad and publicly stated
that the boom was speculative and that institutions should think of selling.
He had just left the Karad trail and, for the first time, got on to Harshad’s
trail. The next day, 10 th March, was crucial. The chiefs of insurance
companies (all government-owned), Pherwani and
SA Dave, chief of UTI, by far the biggest mutual fund player (also
government-owned) were all there for a meeting with the RBI governor. He
opened the meeting with a small note on the astounding rise in share prices.
“The present runaway boom is propelled by bull speculators and not justified
by fundamentals”, he said. “It is not healthy. Do you have a clue why the
prices are going up like this?”
Few people did, except Pherwani, the perpetual bull, earlier friend of
Kothari’s and now arch enemy. Pherwani had proposed the establish-ment of
a new stock exchange at Bombay (which later led to the creation of National
Stock Exchange), which Kothari was opposing in order to protect the preeminent status of BSE. Pherwani vehemently argued that it was a
spontaneous bull run, which demonstrated the market’s faith in the
government’s economic liberalisation. “We should not do anything to disturb
this.” Around the same time he told India Today , “This is the beginning of
an economic miracle in India.”
The governor was not convinced. He asked the institution chiefs: “Don’t
you think it is a good time to book profits?” Most of them agreed in
principle but had their own problems. Autonomous firms like UTI could sell
but most others like the insurance companies, wholly owned and controlled
by the government, had a genuine problem. “If the price jumps up even more

after we sell, we will be pulled up by the government auditors and Public
Accounts Committee for bad judgment”, one of the chiefs of the insurance
companies said.
Nevertheless, the institutions came out and ordered sales of select scrips.
The BSE sensitive index tumbled from 3547 to 3316 – a fall of 231 points
on a single day and another 150 points the next day. Incidentally, even
though the scam story unlocked the most damaging and unnerving flow of
information between May and August, the index did not go far below the
3000-3400 range, a level at which the governor pressed the panic button.
Venkitaramanan wasn’t content asking the institutions to sell. On 13 th
March, he travelled to Madras to address the second annual
JV Somayajulu memorial lecture organised by the Madras Stock Exchange.
He seized the opportunity to ask the stock exchanges to take immediate steps
to cool the market down which was overheated by excessive speculation of
specified shares. For a while, it seemed that the market would obey him. On
12 th March, the sensitive index went up 80 points but fell further, hovering
around the 3100 mark till 20 th March. As a result of the 10 th March
meeting and his continuing interest in the boom, the governor zeroed in on
Harshad Mehta and his source of funds.
Many people felt that Harshad’s money came from the Dubai-based
underworld don, as well as the corporate sector. UTI chief, SA Dave, a
greater admirer of Harshad than Pherwani was, publicly spoke of hot money
inflows into the market. But, nobody knew for certain what Harshad’s source
of money was. Not even his competitors.
On 16 th March, the governor asked Vishvanathan for an extract of
Harshad’s current account maintained at the Bombay main branch.
Vishvanathan contacted the SBI chairman Goiporia. Goiporia asked the
branch to give Harshad’s account statements, which he sent to Vishvanathan
at around six in the evening. She showed the statement to the governor and
sent a note to ND Parameshwaran, with the following comment: “This
statement was sent to me by chairman, SBI at 6.00 p.m. I have shown it to
Governor. There are many large (underlined) credits and debits in the a/c,
and these are all transfer entries. Chairman, SBI said that the vouchers will

be scrutinised tomorrow to see where the funds have come from/transferred.
Our officers should also scrutinise these entries. TOP PRIORITY action
please.”
The volume of money moving in and out of Harshad’s account was then
considered staggering. On 9 th March, for instance, the balance was close to
Rs 186 crore. Transfers in and out of the account have often been of Rs 3040 crore. The statements of accounts were sent to the finance minister. The
governor called up Goiporia: “Please put Harshad Mehta’s account under
continuous monitoring.” Whereas everybody was looking for traces of funds
coming from Dubai and other places, the SBI found out that hundreds of
crores were entering Harshad’s account from Madras. Harshad got to know
that his account was under scrutiny and stopped using the SBI account. The
last entry was of 14 th March – a withdrawal of Rs 48 crore which left a
balance of just Rs 1.61 crore.
For those in the securities business, alternate Fridays were meant for
squaring up or carrying forward transactions. To most of them 20 th March
was a Friday like any other. But for Harshad it was critical. He was running
a huge outstanding position with the SBI and wanted to roll it over.
However, Goiporia was already looking at the extract of his current account
with great alarm. He asked his officers to stop the rollover. Harshad started
contacting his new set of friends with political influence.
In the week beginning 23 rd March, the RBI governor was in Delhi.
Among other things, he planned to address the Euromoney conference. He
spoke just after Cecil Parkinson, a former minister in the Thatcher cabinet,
who had overseen the British government’s privatisation effort. Around the
same time the government had already formed a panel under the
chairmanship of Krishnamurthy to suggest the best ways of disinvesting the
shares of public sector companies. Venkitaramanan suggested that
Krishnamurthy take this opportunity to speak to Parkinson, who seemed to
have good ideas on privatisation.
Krishnamurthy instead took the opportunity to subtly plead for Harshad
Mehta. “He is a bright man. You should meet him”, he sug-gested. The

governor said, “Let him come on his own and not on your recommendation.”
Meanwhile, Harshad was continuing to scout for a source of funds.
It was All Fools’ Day when Harshad went to meet the RBI governor. He
expounded his investment philosophy and his pet theory of how capital
markets and direct portfolio investment were the solution to the country’s
domestic and foreign debt problem. The governor politely told him that he
did not quite agree with him because the only long-term security on the
balance of payments front could come by boosting exports and cutting down
on forex-guzzling expenditure like petroleum imports. Harshad refused to
give up. “I want to make a presentation to you, sir. I need four hours for it.”
The governor said, “I can’t spare four hours for you.”
Harshad then said: “What do you have against me, sir? I have a problem
with SBI, they are not helping me. I am told they are taking instructions
from you, sir. Please speak to them.”
The governor called up Goiporia in Harshad’s presence but deftly avoided
pleading for him. Instead, he encouraged Goiporia to continue to monitor
Harshad’s account. Following the JPC hearings it has, however, been alleged
that the governor had got Harshad Mehta’s account at SBI activated by
speaking to the bank.
Harshad was increasingly desperate for a large source of money. He was
planning Initial Public Offerings of the Growmore companies but that was
some way off. In April, Ashwin Mehta travelled to the UK where apparently
he met the Hindujas. This may have been under Pherwani’s guidance.
Around the same time, somebody from the Hindujas rang up the RBI
governor and said, “We want to bring in 150 million pounds. Is there a quick
way?”
The governor told him, “You can bring it under the normal Foreign
Currency (non-residents) deposit scheme.”

“Is there any other way?” asked the caller. The governor was suspicious.
He dissuaded the Hindujas from doing anything.

Parallel to all this ran SBI’s effort to reconcile its investment portfolio. It
detected that Harshad had not delivered the securities it had paid for.
Harshad started paying back from 13 th April, but on 18 th April, he threw up
his hands. That was the due date for the reversal of Rs 360 crore of double
ready forward transactions in treasury bills, state loans and 11.5% central
loan done for three fortnights.
On 18 th April, SBI decided to roll over the transaction for another two
fortnights. The deal ticket states: “We are compelled to accede to the request
of extension as the broker M/s. Harshad S Mehta expressed his inability to
deliver 11.5% Central Loans.” Harshad subsequently squared up his dues to
the SBI by 24 th April. RBI was curious to know how. Its inspectors
discovered that the bulk of the money (Rs 575 crore) had come from
Grindlays. On 2 nd May, RBI inspectors took a close look at Grindlays
cheques and found that the money had basically come from National
Housing Bank (NHB) whose cheques favouring Grindlays were credited to
Harshad’s account. The governor was informed of this on 4 th May, and from
the next day, RBI started bulldozing the SBI and Grindlays to return the
money to NHB.
Between 1 st and 4 th May, Pherwani was in Goa. He was continuously in
touch with his officials at the NHB. Senior officials at the NHB started a
scrutiny on 1 st May, and over the next seven days prepared a brief to cover
themselves. The report, signed by the executive director, PK Parthasarathy,
was presented to RBI on 5 th May. Around the same time the governor
received a phone call one night. In a gruff voice the caller said: “Let SBI
allow Harshad to roll over his dues for another fortnight. You will sleep in
peace.” The caller was Pherwani.
Since 24 th April, when Harshad had squared up his dues to SBI, he had
been looking for ways and means to return the NHB money but did not
realise how fast the RBI governor was capable of moving. So his initial
reaction after the scam was to hold on to all that he had and not settle. He
was talking to HUDCO to make a Rs 600 crore bond issue and get
Allahabad Bank to subscribe it. He would then have picked up the money
from HUDCO and kept the chain going.

Harshad was also making frantic calls to the governor who refused to
come on the line. He also attempted to meet the revenue secretary, K
Geethakrishnan, and the finance minister but both of them ignored him.
Harshad was advised to sell his holdings to SBI Capital Markets, a fullyowned subsidiary of SBI and thus square up his outstanding position with
SBI. But he was short-sighted enough to worry about the capital-gains tax he
would have had to pay if he sold his holdings. Pallav Sheth and Ashwin told
him that there was no sense in saving on capital gains if he was not going to
be left with capital. Harshad refused to listen. Instead, he created a fresh
liability – with NHB.

“Only two sets of people knew we were in trouble”, says Ashwin. One of
them was Citibank which took obvious pleasure in the fact that Harshad was
finally in a soup. But Citibank was a formidable player in the market,
commercial-minded and keen on grasping a good deal when it saw one,
regardless of whether it came from an enemy. Around 27 th April, Harshad
opened negotiations with Citibank to sell a chunk of his portfolio which was
then worth Rs 400 crore in the market. Citibank’s counter offer was cutthroat: a 35% discount from the prevailing price. The deal fell through. And
the stock bubble that Harshad had created was losing air. By the second
week of May, the Stanchart-Bank of Karad-Metropolitan Bank stream of the
scam was beginning to surface. But Stanchart itself did not know the extent
of the problem. Chairman Pesi Nat met senior RBI officials and sounded
very confident, although by then he knew that the bank was in deep trouble.
In fact, this was a murkier and bigger scam than Harshad’s and involved
some of the luminaries in the financial sector. This tableau of foreign banks,
shady brokers, a flashy businessman and perhaps some ministers would
continue to baffle the investigators for months on end.

Chapter 8
Wielding the Crowbar
Since NHB, a fullyowned subsidiary of
RBI,
had been bilked by
Harshad, RBI got
into the act to protect
its own skin. This, it
concluded, would be
best achieved by
protecting NHB and
savaging SBI and
Grindlays.

DR Robert Edgar, the tall Australian chief executive of ANZ Grindlays
Bank won’t forget Tuesday, 5 th May 1992 in a hurry. Having just returned
from a trip to Bangladesh with his wife, he had barely begun work that
morning when he received a call from PK Parthasarathy, executive director
of National Housing Bank.

“We have some transactions with you. Please reverse them or return the
funds”,demanded Parthasarathy.
Edgar was surprised. “What transactions? Can you give me the details?”
he asked.
Parthasarathy replied that they were related to some bonds and units but
he was unsure. Then with an air of authority he said, bluntly: “You have our
money and that should be enough.”

Edgar told him that it was pointless trying to discuss this over the phone
and that he should write to Grindlays. Edgar did not have to wait for too
long. The same day, NHB despatched a letter – NHB (B) No. 5048/INV-92 –
marked “Secret”, to Edgar’s office. (That started off a series of claims by
NHB on Grindlays, all marked “Secret” until Grindlays asked point-blank
what the secret was.)
Edgar opened the two-page letter with great curiosity at 10 in the morning
on 6 th May. It was signed by the assistant general manager, C Ravi Kumar,
later charged for cheating and fraud by NHB itself.
The letter listed transactions in units (Rs 99.77 crore) and PSU bonds (Rs
152.25 crore) for which NHB had paid money to Grindlays and which were
due for reversals on 5 th May. “However, till the end of the day, the payment
was not forthcoming from your Bank. In this connection, you would kindly
recall the discussions had with you by Shri PK Parthasarathy, executive
director...”
Edgar wrote back to Ravi Kumar that he was not aware of the deals and so
did not “appreciate your request for the reversal of the deals.” He asked him
to clarify “the deals” and “favour us with the documents, if any, in support of
your alleged claim against us.” Soon after, NHB and RBI bosses discovered
that Ravi Kumar himself was deeply involved in nefarious deals.
Meanwhile, Parthasarathy cleverly disappeared from the scene, neither
signing letters nor the First Information Report against NHB officials,
though he was the senior-most of the operating staff.
What Edgar did not know at that time was that two RBI officers ND
Parameshwaran and Vimla Vishvanathan, investigating the scam, had found
out that the money Harshad Mehta had picked up to square his dues with
SBI had gone from NHB into Mehta’s account at Grindlays. NHB was now
trying to dissociate itself. Ignoring the Harshad angle, it was declaring that it
had paid Grindlays hundreds of crores for certain “transactions” which were
due for reversals.
On its own, NHB was not bold enough to take a line tough as this in order
to get back the money which it had turned over to Harshad in active
collusion with him. In this commercial dispute with Grindlays, NHB’s line

was being dictated by the RBI governor himself. But what RBI conveniently
ignored was the mess that NHB itself was. It was being run so shabbily that
for a long time it did not even know what its “claims” against Grindlays
actually were. The 5 th May letter, for instance, mentions Rs 19.26 crore of
transaction in a 9% Coal India bond of 13 th April. The figure was actually
Rs 13.26 crore as stated later in the FIR.
NHB’s bumbling ways became clearer in the subsequent war of letters
with Grindlays. On 7 th May, SD Hosangadi, the chief general manager, restated NHB’s demand to Grindlays without being able to throw any more
light on the “deals”. He added, almost as an after thought: “In case of any
other pending claims we reserve the right to make our claims to you
separately.” Clearly, NHB was groping in the dark. A few hours later on the
same day, it magically pulled out six more deals in units (Rs 67.65 crore)
and bonds (Rs 215.20 crore) between 23 rd March and 20 th April,
discovering that though it paid the money to Grindlays, it had no documents
to back it. It requested Grindlays to give the bank receipts immediately.
Grindlays flatly refused and even found out that one of the trans-actions
cited was not with it; nor had any of its account holders received the money.
In that same letter (of 11 th May), for the first time, Edgar disclosed that the
NHB money had gone into Harshad Mehta’s account. As part of its shrewd
move to keep the pressure on NHB, Grindlays kept on insisting that NHB
supply documentary proof of the transactions. The transactions against
which it gave out money were probably fictitious. NHB’s claim kept shifting
from one letter to another. In the first couple of letters, it could not even
name the bonds transacted, referring to them generically as “PSU bonds”.
Nevertheless, it reacted with shock and surprise, in a letter dated 12 th
May, at the fact that Grindlays had credited the NHB cheques to Harshad’s
account. Equally shocking though, was the fact that its own books continued
to be in such a bad mess that it was still discovering its deals. This was
reflected in the annexure to the 12 th May letter – a detailed table of its
outstanding deals with Grindlays. The table carried fresh transactions dating
back to 11 th December 1991 and 21 st February 1992. It also reduced the

outstanding transactions mentioned in earlier letters. The amount due as per
this table: Rs 520 crore.
Grindlays greeted the constantly shifting and expanding composi-tion of
NHB’s claims with derision and disdain. But NHB was undeterred.
Hosangadi wrote to Grindlays: “Our accounts are under audit and in case
any further transactions come to light, we reserve our right to prefer further
claims on your bank.” On 3 rd June, almost one month after it made the first
demand, NHB finally arrived at a definite list of transactions and submitted a
final claim of Rs 506 crore. Shortly before this, K Jaybharat Reddy replaced
MJ Pherwani as a part-time chairman of NHB.
Meanwhile, NHB was creating a similar confusion with SBI. On 27 th
April, four days after the scam surfaced, SBI wrote to NHB asking if there
were any outstanding transactions with the bank. NHB said that there
weren’t. But as usual, it really hadn’t a clue. It had entered into ten
transactions with SBI between 25 th October and 30 th March and every
single one was to be reversed on the same day – 5 th May 1992.
On 5 th May, NHB woke up. Ravi Kumar dashed off a letter to the SBI
asking it to reverse four transactions amounting to Rs 262 crore 5 . Then,
NHB managed to dig out from its mess, four more outstanding transactions.
The total claim Rs 604.61 crore 6 .
Astonishingly, included was a claim of Rs 44.97 crore on State Bank of
Patiala. All these were to be reversed on 5 th May, curiously the same day
that NHB made its first claim on Grindlays. SBI denied it had any of these
transactions in its books and heard nothing from NHB. Then three weeks
later, on 27 th May, there was another demand from NHB. By this time
NHB’s transactions with SBI had mysteriously swelled to Rs 724 crore. It
included two deals dating back to end-1991 and interest of Rs 27 crore.
Then on 3 rd June, NHB slapped another demand claim, taking the final
outstanding amount to Rs 734.73 crore. Later, as it did with Grindlays, it dug
out still more records, got wiser and pared its claim down to Rs 707.76
crore. Strangely, in this commercial dispute between NHB on one side and

Grindlays and SBI on the other, RBI decided to take the side of NHB and
pressure the other parties to pay up.
It is hard to understand how the governor found NHB even remotely
defensible. NHB was established in July 1988 as a fully-owned subsidiary of
RBI but till the scam was exposed, had no board of directors. Under the Act,
the board was supposed to consist of fourteen members drawn from various
fields, RBI and the government 7 . Such an exalted board was never formed.
Instead, since April 1991, it had been headed by a part-time chairman, the
consummate deal-maker, Pherwani, aided by an executive director,
Parthasarathy. In the first place, NHB was supposed to promote housing. So
how did it get involved in the securities scam?
The central figure in that saga was Pherwani, who as the part-time
chairman of NHB and three other financial organisations, was more active
than many full-time managing directors. Pherwani’s boundless energy, his
broad vision and his ability to strike big multi-cornered deals involving
politicians, big businessmen and bureaucrats are the answer to a key
question: why did NHB get dragged into huge money market operations and
oblige Harshad with Rs 1200 crore worth of fictitious deals?
Pherwani was the original Big Bull of the Indian stock market, a sobriquet
he earned when, as the chairman of UTI, he could move the stock market
single-handedly. He was removed from that position just after VP Singh
became the Prime Minister in November 1989. UTI had allowed Reliance
Industries to gain control of Larsen and Toubro in 1988 by passing on a large
block of L&T equity to Reliance in a cosy deal. The Ambanis of Reliance
and Singh had been engaged in an open war since 1985. Interestingly,
though chiefs of other financial institutions too, had to bend rules to help the
Ambanis gain entry into L&T, it was Pherwani alone who got the sack.
Then Sharad Pawar, as chief minister of Maharashtra, made him the
chairman of the Maharashtra State Financial Corporation and Chandra
Shekhar, when he became the Prime Minister, put him in charge of NHB.
Pherwani started making big plans for these two institutions as well as for
the Stock Holding Corporation and the Infrastructure Leasing & Financial
Services – two other institutions of which he was the chairman, though
without executive authority.

He was energetic, ambitious and quick in taking decisions. But as the L
&T takeover proved, he was reckless and ever ready to cut a deal to help
someone. Pherwani, who was not around to defend himself when the scam
investigations started, denied till the last day that he had anything to do with
NHB dropping hundreds of crores into Harshad Mehta’s accounts in SBI and
Grindlays. Few people believed him. To the players in the financial markets,
it was a typical Pherwani move to oblige his friends and associates.
Whatever be the truth, NHB was ripe for a major fraud. Contrary to the
picture portrayed by RBI, it was not a helpless victim of a heist. Under the
chairmanship of Pherwani, NHB turned itself into an aggressive player in
money markets. Between April 1991 and 1992, it had entered into 1332
money market deals worth Rs 26,400 crore, the bulk of it in call money,
public sector bonds and units. Its disputed transactions with SBI date back to
October 1991.
Pherwani, who in all senses acted like a managing director, presided over
a complete lack of checks, balances and even the most elementary form of
internal control in NHB’s funds management department. All fund
management operations were handled by Ravi Kumar, who was not only a
dealer but also the signatory of cheques. He was helped by S Suresh Babu,
assistant manager in funds management. In April 1991, Ravi Kumar asked
for and was given authority by the chairman to enter into ready forward
deals. NHB sold bonds, which did not exist in its books and lent money to
Harshad Mehta, disguising it as call money transactions. It paid money to
SBI against supposed deals in treasury bills and government loans but
received no securities. Nor did SBI’s books show any record of these deals.
Suspicion that Pherwani knew and authorised the deals, remained. But on
4 May, one day before he called Edgar, Parthasarathy absolved himself
and the chairman from any wrongdoing even before he knew fully what had
happened. His note, addressed to the RBI governor, is an extraordinarily
watered-down version of NHB’s capers.
th

It stated that NHB had always done back-to-back deals, never through a
broker, never staked its own money and that none of its deals were
authorised by the chairman or executive director. This note attempted to pass
the blame on to two junior officials but failed to dispel suspicion that

somebody higher up took the decision to favour Harshad Mehta by turning
over the money to him. Parthasarathy was known to have a bureaucratic
mind and a wishy-washy approach; so how was the note so categorical? It
was quite obvious that Pherwani had dictated it, which explains the tone and
the emphatic attempt to absolve the chairman.
Apart from the suspicion about Pherwani’s role, a big question mark
hangs over the mysterious M Varshneya, former chairman of the Punjab
National Bank, who was a director at Harshad’s Mazda Industries at an
astronomical salary. Varshneya was also an advisor to NHB. He was allowed
to quietly retire and was never been questioned by either CBI or JPC or even
RBI, despite the fact that he was the most obvious link between Harshad
Mehta and NHB.
Apart from Pherwani, C Rangarajan was the other important NHB
director who was later replaced by R Janakiraman. When Pherwani stepped
down, K Jaybharat Reddy, additional secretary in the depart-ment of
banking, stepped in. Coincidentally, Janakiraman and Reddy were both
directors in SBI. Since it was discovered that the subsidiary of RBI had been
bilked by Harshad, RBI got into the act to protect its own skin. This, it
concluded, would be best achieved by protecting NHB and savaging SBI and
Grindlays. RBI decided to force SBI and Grindlays to repay the money they
had deposited into Harshad’s account. This was a shrewd but ethically
dubious move that had the full sanction of the ministry of finance.
It was, in fact, seamlessly co-ordinated. Three weeks after Parthasarathy
sent his note, Jaybharat Reddy too, wrote to the governor, virtually repeating
what the earlier note had said. But there was a small difference. Reddy did
not indulge in Parthasarathy’s blatant whitewashing. His letter admitted that
“unfortunately, although the transaction details are recorded in NHB’s
books, the concerned NHB officials have not obtained the necessary
documents such as contract notes and cost memos and bank receipts for the
transactions.” Reddy cited retired Justice of Bombay High Court, B Lentin’s
opinion that Grindlays’ and SBI’s action in crediting cheques to Harshad’s
account was contrary to the law and requested the governor to “bestow
immediate attention to the matter and help us out of this difficult situation.”

The governor applied his mind and emerged with this logic: RBI and
NHB had no claim against Harshad. Since it was Grindlays and SBI which
had credited cheques to his account, it was their books which should have
the outstanding against Mehta. At least SBI had recovered some money but
Grindlays was taking a tough line with RBI, arguing that crediting banker’s
cheques to an individual account like Harshad’s was a “accepted market
practice”. To combat Grindlays better, RBI first wanted to set an example by
getting SBI to pay. In a sense, the governor’s logic was not wrong. But it
was accompanied by some very nasty tricks, a shameless disregard of
principles that would have prevented a conflict of interest or even explicit
points of law. The SBI drama, coincidentally, began on 23 rd April, the day
the scam was exposed.
That day the SBI executive committee, comprising a core section of the
board of directors, was scheduled to meet. It was a four-member committee
headed by the chairman. One of the members was Janakiraman, who, by
wearing five hats at the same time, made a mockery of the principle of
conflict of interest. He was in the SBI executive committee, a deputy
governor of RBI, head of the RBI appointed committee investigating the
scam, a director of SBI and NHB.
The committee questioned the chairman about the report published by The
Times of India that morning. Goiporia admitted: “Yes, the story is true. The
amount involved is over Rs 622 crore.” He claimed that the money had been
recovered from Harshad Mehta, though there was a small dispute of Rs 3-4
crore which Harshad claimed was double counted. A few weeks after this,
RBI started pressing SBI to pay back NHB the money Harshad had given to
square up. Incidentally, the letter from RBI to SBI was signed by a junior
official and not the governor nor any of the deputy governors. Goiporia
replied to RBI around 22 nd May.
The next meeting of the executive committee was held under the threat of
RBI’s demand that it pay up over Rs 706 crore to NHB. Goiporia said that he
would refer the matter to the executive committee for their approval. The
executive committee felt that the matter ought to be discussed with the entire
board. Goiporia pointed out that the board had met barely a few weeks ago

but the members insisted that another meeting be called. It was scheduled for
11 th June.
Just before the meeting was held, Goiporia was asked to go on leave. SBI
directors were convinced that this was caused by the angry letter he wrote to
the RBI governor refusing to pay NHB. Senior SBI officials feel that the
bank’s tough stance invited the CBI’s reign of terror leading to raids, rude
interrogations and tapped phone lines.
The role of the RBI governor and of the ministry of finance is intriguing,
especially on the issue of Goiporia’s exit. Goiporia went on leave on 2 nd
June. At 10.20 that morning, he got a call from the RBI governor asking him
to resign. Ten minutes later, even before he could act on that call, there was
another one. This time the caller was Montek Singh Ahluwalia, secretary,
department of economic affairs. He asked Goiporia to go on leave, not
resign. Goiporia expressed his confusion. Ahluwalia promised to call him
back which he did fifteen minutes later. Goiporia was to go on leave, after
all, and he quietly retired without a blemish on 31 st July 1992, quite
relieved, according to his friends, that he did not have to face the gathering
turmoil.
He left before he had received any reply to the angry letter he had dashed
off on 22 nd May, refusing to pay NHB. In fact, a reply did arrive – on 10 th
June, a day before the NHB board meeting. It was framed by Janakiraman,
who declared that both NHB and SBI were in the wrong. The letter was
tabled before the board the next day. The 11 th June meeting was chaired by
Shrikant Ruparel, a businessman who controls the Kolhapur Sugar Mills and
who had been a non-executive director of SBI for over eighteen years. There
were two items on the agenda: a discussion on the securities scam and the
payment to NHB. Ruparel said that each director would be allowed to
express his views though he, as the chairman, and the two managing
directors would not vote.
Every director who spoke was against the payment. The represen-tatives
of the trade unions (Godbole and Awasthi) were virulently critical of RBI.
Janakiraman had brought with him the correspondence between SBI and
NHB. He said “the RBI has made a decision and the SBI should abide by it.”

He suggested that the money be placed in an escrow account (a separate
account in which the funds deposited cannot be used without the consent of
both parties in the dispute) without prejudice to the rights of SBI. Up to this
point, the issue of payment to NHB was not even open, since the opposition
to the proposal was so strong that the directors were certain it would be
turned down.
At 5 p.m., the two government directors, Reddy and Janakiraman, excused
themselves to attend the first ever meeting of NHB. (Janakiraman was aware
that NHB did not even have a fully constituted board until the first
Janakiraman Report was out. He may have deliberately suppressed that fact
in his first report.) After the two directors left, the deputy managing directors
of SBI, who had attended the meeting mainly as observers, filed out and did
not return. Janakiraman and Reddy wound up the NHB meeting thereafter. A
set of documents was circulated to the newly constituted board, including the
5 th May letter from Parthasarathy, which pointed out that two officers, Ravi
Kumar and Suresh Babu, had signed the cheques and authorised transactions
without the knowledge of the top brass.
One of the directors, HT Parekh, the grand old man of Indian finance,
rebuked the government directors for failing to constitute a board or
systematise the securities transactions. On the whole, the meeting served no
purpose other than recording the fact that the first ever board meeting
depended on the SBI meeting which had been suspended halfway so that
Reddy and Janakiraman could make a dash for the NHB meeting and come
back.
But before these two directors rejoined the SBI meeting, they made two
critical calls. The first was to the finance minister and the second, to the RBI
governor. These two conversations changed the course of the meeting. The
two directors came back to the meeting and threatened the SBI board that the
ministry would issue a directive under the RBI Act, asking the bank to pay
up. The two government directors now said that an escrow account was not
good enough. They not only wanted SBI to take a decision on the payment
but also to pay up immediately.
The two directors were supported by the SBI deputy managing director, V
Mahadevan (apparently he was told informally that he may be in line for the

chairman’s job) and by CL Anand, promoter of Punjab Anand Batteries and
PV Subba Rao. Reddy and Janakiraman argued that if SBI did not pay up,
RBI could not make Grindlays pay the Rs 506 crore to NHB either.
However, this point was deliberately omitted from the minutes of the
meeting. One of the two directors pointed out that after the governor had met
the Grindlays top brass in London, the bank had written to RBI that if SBI
was refusing to pay why shouldn’t Grindlays? In response, one SBI director
asked Janakiraman that if instead of NHB it had been Citibank or Bank of
America which had made payments to Harshad Mehta, would SBI still have
been asked to pay up? There was no reply. At that meeting, it was reiterated
every thirty minutes that Harshad Mehta was not a broker for NHB.
However, this wasn’t entirely true.
In any case, asked some directors, if NHB did not and was not supposed
to have a broker how did the money go to SBI? Even at the bankers’ round
table to flush out outstanding BRs, NHB had claimed that it had no
outstanding BRs with SBI and Grindlays. What also remains unexplained is
that while the Bank of Karad and the Metropolitan Co-operative Bank were
liquidated for the dues against them, NHB had to be protected, however
strong the stench rising from its backyard. None but two of NHB’s officials
have been arrested, while the SBI’s top brass lived in terror of CBI raids and
interrogation. Interestingly, SBI’s own probing led to the discovery that a
good chunk of the money, which was paid into Harshad Mehta’s account at
SBI, had found its way back to NHB from time to time. This indicates a
well-organised system of using NHB which couldn’t have existed without
the collusion of its senior officials.
The SBI board caved in under the threat of a directive and the resolution
was passed unanimously. And then finally, the drama ends: how did SBI pay
back? It once again debited Harshad’s account, which had no balance. In
effect, SBI was asked to give the Big Bull another massive overdraft of Rs
707 crore with no security! Looking back, many of the directors were
embarrassed at their non-resistance. According to one of them, “we gave in
for two reasons. First, almost Rs 570 crore paid to NHB would have come
back to SBI subsidiaries from where NHB had got the money in the first
place.” Second, Mahadevan was convinced that SBI was in the wrong. Of
course, nobody analysed whether there was a criminal intent to defraud
when the cheques were issued. According to the SBI directors, NHB did not

have a bank account. It gave bankers cheques drawn on RBI. Whether they
were meant for SBI or for Harshad Mehta, at the most the action of crediting
cheques to Harshad’s account could be termed irregular.
The crowbar-wielding did not end with that farcical board meeting and
forced payment to NHB. On 25 th June, the SBI board met again, this time
for adopting the annual accounts. The two government directors,
Janakiraman and Reddy, who had graced the SBI board meeting on 11 th
June, had again disappeared. Ironically, those SBI directors, who in the first
place had bitterly opposed the payment made to NHB, now, had to bear the
brunt of auditors’ queries as to why the money was paid and had to lay open
the correspondence to justify such payment. The auditors also grilled them
on why the Rs 707 crore payments was a tax-deductible expenditure.
Soon after, the SBI annual general meeting (AGM) was held at Patna.
This time the directors sent an SOS to the government requesting that
government directors be present to argue the case for paying NHB. Some of
the ex-officio directors also threatened to speak out on what had transpired at
the board meeting. Their ambitions were cut short. Arun Jaswantlal and
Shrikant Ruparel were simply stopped from making it to the AGM. Their
flight was booked for Patna but phone calls from Mahadevan and Virendra
Kumar of SBI on 13 th and 14 th July, cancelled their plans and
unceremoniously ended their association with the bank.
A 1988 amendment to the SBI Act had suddenly been enforced and under
it, no director could remain on the board for more than six years at a stretch.
A quick notification was issued. The notification applied only to the
independent directors of SBI but the directors representing the employees’
unions were also replaced. According to some, indirect pressure had been
brought on the unions to change their men on the board.
In all these calculations over who owes what to whom, one very
significant claim was never discussed. Harshad Mehta claimed that NHB
owed him Rs. 250 crore of money market securities handed over to it as
informal collateral. The securities were seized by CBI and handed over to
the Custodian. It was yet another proof of NHB having a deeper relationship

with the broker than it was willing to admit. Later SBI planned to sue
Harshad for 707 crore.
Grindlays, in exactly the same position as SBI, continued to fight RBI. On
5 November 1992, it called a press conference and announced its decision
to pay up. It was still confident that it would win back the money in
arbitration. But this was uncertain. RBI had obtained copies of cheques that
Grindlays itself was issuing to others, carrying clear instructions whom to
credit them to. But commercial disputes apart, Grindlays continued to apply
pressure on New Delhi to make RBI relent. That was the unseen face of the
foreign banks. Their clout and their buccaneering merit a separate chapter.
th

Chapter 9
Stanchart and the Gang of Five
Looked at
individually, there
was no connection
between the five. But
put Bhupen Dalal in
the middle and
suddenly they all
come together,
deeply
interconnected.

It was the evening of 12 th May 1992. Bhupen Dalal, the suave, six-foot
investment banker, was back from work and about to look at some files he
had brought home. He had wide business interests apart from investment
banking: a departmental store, a food processing company, stock-broking,
and a clutch of companies abroad. He also had a stake in a tiny private bank.
And then the phone rang.
At the other end was R Kannan, executive director of Standard Chartered
Bank who headed the investment banking division, which then included the
treasury department. The call was the beginning of a major setback in the
glorious career of Bhupen Dalal, one of the most respected names in
Bombay’s financial world. It went something like this:

“Kannan here, please speak to Nat.”
Parvesh Singh Nat, popularly known as Pesi, was a highly ambitious
banker and the first Indian chief executive of Stanchart in India. He was

responsible for pushing the bank to the high-growth path. Stanchart, which
had started operations in India 135 years ago and had the second largest
branch network among foreign banks, made wafer-thin profits. Nat, tall like
Bhupen, with a patrician bearing, spoke in a British accent and had a
marvellous ability to articulate his thoughts vividly. Bhupen and he had been
friends so when he called, Bhupen suspected nothing. Pesi did not waste any
words.

“Bhupen, my broker has taken away BRs worth Rs 250 crore. I don’t have
any securities in my record. Can I have them back?”

“Rs 250 crore? What are you talking about Pesi?”
Nat repeated what he had said. Bhupen, apparently perplexed, promised to
call him back.
Nat was referring to the Rs 250 crore paid by Stanchart to a broker called
Hiten Dalal for the purchase of government securities. Hiten was yet to
deliver them. What he had delivered were paper receipts from another bank,
Bank of Karad, which got the money from Hiten and was supposed to
deliver the securities to him. Bank of Karad, with a capital of barely Rs 45
lakh, was such an insignificant entity that very few banks dealt with it
directly. Hardly anyone in the financial world even knew that it was a big
operator in the money markets. That Bhupen and his son Milan were
directors of Bank of Karad with a 6.7% stake was intriguing. Bhupen’s was
the single largest private holding. Was he personally liable to Stanchart for
the money that the Bank of Karad took?
From that one phone call, Bhupen Dalal would be drawn into a vortex of
events that would tarnish his three-generations-old market reputation and
destroy his core business of money management and financial advisory
services. Worse, for a man who had never been booked even for a traffic
offence, Bhupen would have to spend thirty days in police custody, treated
like an ordinary thief. Immediately before his arrest, a frightened Dalal told
Business India , “All that I have built up over thirty years will just collapse. I
cannot even show my face.”

The spotlight had slowly started turning on Bhupen since 30 th April,
exactly seven days after the scam was first exposed by The Times of India .
Unknown to him, within the magnificent Victorian structure that served as
the head office of Stanchart, the atmosphere was beginning to turn tense.
Stanchart officials had woken up that morning to the horror of a massive and
complicated fraud – a fraud that eventually involved a far bigger sum than
the Rs 250-crore gap that had impelled Nat to call Dalal.
The gap was discovered through a confession. On 30 th April, Arvind
Mohan Lal, star dealer of the bank and “Pesi’s blue-eyed boy”, went to his
boss Ravi Iyer, director of the local currency group, and told him of the
shortfall. Lal, manager in the Money and Investments Unit, with four dealers
working under him, told Iyer that the bank was short of Rs 300 crore of
securities it had apparently bought. It had paid out the money through its
broker but had not received any securities, subsidiary general ledger receipts
or BRs. The broker: Hiten Dalal.
A stunned Iyer sat with Lal trying to figure out the extent of the damage.
Nobody in the bank knew of the disaster then, though the market was abuzz
with rumours that Stanchart would soon be dragged into the scam. For the
next ten days Lal and Iyer quizzed Hiten on the transactions, cajoling him to
produce securities to fill the gap. Hiten was most helpful. He dropped in at
the bank every day and assured an increasingly jittery Lal and Iyer that he
would meet the gap.
Alarmingly, the hole kept getting bigger and bigger.
By 4 th May, it was an astounding Rs 900 crore. How on earth, would
Stanchart recover the money? The ever-resourceful Hiten had a ready
solution. He would procure more BRs to paper the hole temporarily. “From
where?”asked Lal and Iyer. From the Metropolitan Co-operative Bank, Hiten
replied.
By 5 th May, Hiten delivered a BR of Rs 525 crore and SGLs of
Rs 50 crore from the Metro Bank. They showed Stanchart’s investment in
(non-existent) units of UTI. The more Iyer looked at them, the more he
realised that he was dealing with a fraud and one that was too big for him to

handle. He probably hadn’t even heard of Metro Bank then a tiny onebranch operation with a capital of just Rs 14 lakh.
On Sunday, 10 th May, Iyer and Lal called Pesi Nat at his home and told
him about the problem. They made another call, later that night, to Kannan,
Iyer’s boss. Nat had asked Iyer and Lal over to his house at Altamount Road.
Married to a member of the royal family of Patiala, Nat lived in a plush
apartment appointed with antique furniture, paintings and books.
At 2.30 that afternoon, Nat was told the complete story. He couldn’t
believe what he heard. “Perhaps there is something wrong with your
computer systems”, he told Lal and Iyer. Before he pressed the alarm bells,
he wanted to be sure that it wasn’t a book-keeping error. The sums were just
too large.
Stanchart officials spent the next two days (11 th and 12 th ) assessing the
losses and trying to persuade Hiten to provide genuine additional securities.
Monday, 11 th May, Hiten came in with Rs 145 crore of shares, debentures
and public-sector bonds. He promised more the next day. On Tuesday, he
brought an insignificant lot of securities. Nat did not have to wait any longer
to make up his mind.

“I think we have a problem here”, he said, calling Stanchart’s
headquarters at London on Wednesday, “We need to investigate and I don’t
have adequate resources here to do it.”
Soon Stanchart’s Bombay office was swarming with reinforcements from
the head office. Unfortunately, for the bank, most of them turned out to be
ignorant, high-handed and naive. It was on the same day that Nat called
Bhupen Dalal about the Rs 250-crore shortfall.
Stanchart’s Indian officials latched on to Hiten Dalal, repeatedly
interrogating him to understand what had happened. Hiten would drive down
to the bank every day after office hours in his maroon Premier 118NE.
Amazingly, the bank took at least two weeks to figure out what was
happening in its own house, and months thereafter to get to the bottom of its
transactions. On the face of it, there were fifteen suspect deals but that figure

was very misleading. Each of these fifteen led to a forest of twenty to thirty
complex transactions, fanning out in different directions.
Clearly, Stanchart was in a big mess. Worse, there was a discrepancy of
Rs 92 crore between what the bank put as its claims in the First Information
Report filed on 20 th June and what it disclosed to the Janakiraman
Committee appointed by RBI to probe the fraud. The FIR stated that
Stanchart had paid Rs 308 crore “to other banks for which no securities were
received from those banks.” The Janakiraman Report, published in July, put
this figure at Rs 400.35 crore, pointedly clarifying that this was “as indicated
by the bank.” Did the bank indicate one thing to CBI and another to the
committee? It did, initially. Later, it corrected itself.
That was typical of Stanchart. After the story broke and its operations
were exposed, it became clear that it had lost control in its race down the fast
track, beginning 1988 when it first began restructuring itself. Led by Pesi
Nat, the bank went on a hiring spree to beef up its corporate lending, retail
banking and investment banking. Its role model was Citibank, which was
making huge profits by cunningly skirting regulations.
Stanchart set steep targets for itself. Towards mid-1991, Kannan first
added 25% to the yearly profit target agreed to at the beginning of the year
and then brought forward the target date to October. Nat, who replaced
Magnus Stirling, the last expatriate chief, harboured a desire to beat Citibank
in profits and make it to the Stanchart board in London, say his former
colleagues. It was quite possible. But what made it difficult was the
devaluation, which put greater pressure on the Indian operations to meet the
targets set in terms of pound sterling. Another source of pressure was the
bank’s long-term view that the rupee would continue to slide, making
present, rather than future profits more valuable.
A chase for the big bucks put the investment banking department on its
toes. Presiding over it was Kannan, a sharp, restless deal-maker. Kannan was
hired in 1990 for his expertise in the non-funds business, for instance,
advising on takeovers or the best means available for companies to raise
money. He wanted to position his department as a premier investment bank
specialising in takeovers, specifically take-over of banks, which he felt was
an uncharted but fast growing area thanks to the impending financial

liberalisation. He put through the takeover of Nedungadi Bank by B
Ratnakar, his mentor in Canara Bank, and tried to broker the sale of the
Bombay branch of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International to the
Emirates Bank.

He was also preparing to invade the stock markets where shooting share
prices gave phenomenal returns to clever investors, especially big investors
who could use inside information to stay ahead of the market movements.
Citibank and ANZ Grindlays Bank were, for instance, making use of the
booming stock market to post record profits. Kannan planned a stockbroking outfit, a mutual fund and re-vamping Stanchart’s joint-venture
company, Cholamandalam Finance and Investment.
Unfortunately, Stanchart’s big push coincided with a period of great
turbulence (1991-92) in the money markets from where it planned to reap
big money. The bank moved too fast, too soon, without pausing to check
whether its control procedures were being followed properly. As Bhupen
Dalal argued later, like any other international bank, Stanchart surely would
have pre-set exposure limits for each country and within a country, for each
bank and individual brokers. According to insiders, the bank perhaps had a
US $200 million exposure to India and a limit of Rs 2 crore for Bank of
Karad. It had no limits for Metro Bank whose BRs worth Rs 525 crore, the
bank accepted on 5 th May even when news of the Harshad Mehta scam was
raging.
In 1991-92, Stanchart emerged as the second largest trader of securities
among all banks. On the face of it, there was nothing wrong with this, except
that senior Stanchart officials made no effort to see where its BRs were
going or how many outstanding BRs of other banks it was holding. Within
the imperfect securities market, this left large room for siphoning out money.
The bank’s asset-liabilities committee comprised Kannan, Nat and David
Gardiner among other people, who met once a fortnight to review
investments, cash flows and the funds position.
The question that struck Stanchart’s top management after the scam came
to light was that if the bank was short of Rs 1300 crore, how was it that the
cash flow statements did not flash the red signal? The answer: Stanchart was
not in possession of the fictitious assets it had bought. Besides, it had sold
them forward, making the transactions cash-neutral. The discrepancy could
have been thrown up by the asset position, but it was obviously doctored.
As the scam story unfolded over May and June, it became clear that
Stanchart had thrown all rules and caution to the wind in attempting to

emulate Citibank down to its dealing room and lines of control. Its biggest
deals were with the shadiest player of all, Hiten Dalal. In one case, the bank
even accepted a photocopy of a public sector bond from Hiten. Such
appalling practices in a large international bank remain an enigma. Possibly,
its 1990 restructuring brought in people who had little experience of
conservative banking and who carried into the bank a cultural apathy
towards rules or what has come to be known as the cowboy school of
banking.
This is partly exemplified by the story of Prakash Yardi. Yardi was asked
to leave the bank soon after he sent a report to the head office detailing what
he perceived were the risks the Merchant Banking Division was exposing
itself to. But since MBD was the bank’s main chip in its bet to boost profits,
it had its own budgets and steep profit targets. It also had its own set of
ethics. MBD’s profit drive was led by the go-getting Ranjit Mathrani, head
of MBD in London who had joined the bank in January 1988.
Mathrani, to whom the Indian MBD chief reported directly, brought in
some sound changes like incentive-linked pay but his ambitious profit
targets clashed with the meagre business opportunities merchant banking
offered in India. Even those were tightly circumscribed by the banking rules.
“To some these rules were unnecessary hurdles in the way to making
profits”, says a top executive of the bank.
Merchant banking (or investment banking) in India was basically the
management of Initial Public Offerings for a fee that was too low for foreign
banks with their high overheads to make profits on. Like Citibank, which
figured it out long ago, some senior Stanchart executives realised that the
bank could make money only by bending rules. Nevertheless, profits fell
short of targets and Stanchart started losing people.
The bank had some curious recruits. It hired a person who was sacked by
Grindlays for making money on the side. When this was pointed out to a
senior MBD executive, he remarked: “If he has made money for himself he
will make money for the bank too.” Another employee was hired for his
Cambridge academic record. He soon launched his own trading outfit on the
side. The man was later wanted for gold smuggling and figured in the
Interpol list. According to one top Stanchart executive, “The value scale got

disturbed with the advent of new people. There were not enough
counterweights from the cadre of hardcore bankers.”
This resulted in MBD lending money to the corporate sector and later to
brokers like Hiten Dalal as clean credit, lending that would have been
questioned by hard-nosed bankers. MBD was asked to draw up a list of cashrich companies, borrow money from them and then lend it in the intercorporate market. Money flowed into Stanchart’s pool from public sector
companies like Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilisers, Power Finance
Corporation (under CBI investigation for having lent more than Rs 300 crore
to Harshad Mehta through Grindlays) and oil companies.
This meant three things: the bank was taking a risk on the borrower,
unapproved by the bank because it didn’t fall under mainline corporate
lending; the exposure was not reflected in the balance sheet; and it amounted
to breaking the RBI rule of reserve requirement. Collecting corporate money
(ostensibly to invest in units and bonds but lending it out) was a kind of
disguised deposit taking. But since the bank wasn’t reserving 40% of it to
meet the statutory liquidity ratio and cash reserve ratio, it amounted to a
violation of RBI regulations. The third report of RBI’s Janakiraman
Committee, points out that Citibank was caught doing exactly this – another
instance of how Stanchart tried to model itself on Citibank.
As a credit risk assessor, Yardi attempted to point out that MBD was
saddling the bank with high risks. Kannan, who had a close personal
knowledge of clients, was less bothered by conventional risk-assessment
criteria. He relied on his personal equation with clients developed during his
Canbank Financial Services days and his commercial intuition – essential
ingredients to staying ahead of the competition. He told Yardi as much. But
Yardi stuck to his guns.
Through all this, the Stanchart headquarters were in deep slumber. When
Yardi alerted a member of the Stanchart plc board (the parent bank in the
UK) in September 1990, it sent some inspectors down. They detected serious
violations. The amounts were small – just about Rs 111 crore of outstanding.
The problems were covered up well and Yardi was out of the bank on 14 th
December. By that time, however, Mathrani was no longer in charge of the

Indian MBD. In February 1991, Nat got the Indian merchant bank to report
to the main bank and Kannan was elevated has the head of MBD.
It is open to question whether any of this was relevant to the soup that
Stanchart found itself in later. Stanchart did not suffer losses because of its
merchant banking function, as Yardi had feared. But in a way, the seeds of
the payment discrepancies in its back office were sown by the risk-taking
attitude of those days. The level of comfort MBD employees had in making
risky commitments and the trust they reposed in their clients had gone out of
control. The treasury division, which was sandwiched with MBD to form the
Investment Banking Division perhaps unconsciously adopted the same
reckless, intuitive approach while making the securities transactions with a
tiny bank like Bank of Karad and a broker like Hiten Dalal. By the time the
scam surfaced, Stanchart’s internal checks and balances had comp-letely
fallen apart.
Worse, when the bank was inspected by the internal auditor, in October
1991, it was not only given a clean chit but also rated as one of the best
treasury divisions world-wide. That apart, there were two more audits, one
on 30 th June, and another on 31 st December, to help the Stanchart PLC
consolidate its accounts. None of these detected any irregularity. Ultimately
the great irony would be that Stanchart, where Kannan worked and Canfina,
where he had honed his skills, would both be deeply embroiled in the scam –
gypped by the same broker, Hiten Dalal.
But where does Bhupen Dalal figure in all this?
As CBI saw it, Bhupen was smack in the middle of the huge murky scam
involving Stanchart. This scam ran parallel to the one involving Harshad
Mehta. The two were linked only in a very basic way – in the use of BRs and
unmatched transactions. Mehta had used undelivered securities and BRs to
raise money. So had Bank of Karad. But the similarity ends there.
Harshad was pumping money into stock markets, raising prices to
astronomical heights, locked in a combat of egos with a cartel of brokers
opposed to him. But the Bhupen Dalal story was different. Bhupen was not
dirtying his fingers in raw stock trading. Besides, unlike a direct nexus
between Harshad and National Housing Bank, this was more complex. There

were three victims and two profiteers. Stanchart was not the only bank that
suffered. A few days after the Harshad Mehta story broke, Canfina, a fullyowned subsidiary of Canara Bank, discovered that it was stuck with BRs
worth Rs 435.31 crore issued by Karad and received through Hiten Dalal.
These BRs were unsupported by securities. Similarly, Canbank Mutual Fund
was short by Rs 104 crore. On the other hand, Stanchart had accepted fake
BRs from another bank – the tiny Metro Bank. But Bhupen alone was not in
the middle of the scam, according to Stanchart.
You could call it the Gang of Five, depending on how wide your
description of the suspected swindlers of the Stanchart and Canfina money
is. A little more than two weeks after the Harshad Mehta scam surfaced and
a few days after Pherwani died, the Gang of Five emerged. They were
unknown people. Hiten who? Abhay who? asked everybody when their
names first appeared. The public, of course, was not expected to know these
gentlemen. But except for a small circle, not even those connected to the
financial sector were familiar with them. This core group, as understood by
CBI and Stanchart, consisted of Abhay Narottam, JP Gandhi, Teju Ruia,
Hiten Dalal and Bhupen Dalal. Two others were suspected to have dipped
their fingers in the scam money. One, S Ramaswamy, proprietor of Excel &
Co., a small broking firm and two, industrialist Hemant Vyas, controlling
Bombay Silk Mills Ltd. and Prag Bosimi Ltd.
Looked at individually, there was no connection between the five. Abhay
Narottam apparently had nothing to do with Hiten Dalal (though four
months later a different picture emerged) and JP Gandhi had no connection
with Teju Ruia. But put Bhupen Dalal in the middle and suddenly they all
come together, deeply interconnected. Deep enough for CBI to have put all
of them behind bars for interrogation. The links through Bhupen were wide
and aroused deep suspicion in Stanchart’s eyes.
Bhupen and his son were directors in Bank of Karad, which was caught
issuing BRs at the rate at which RBI prints currency. That by itself was not a
crime. The problem was that the BRs issued by Karad and Metro Bank were
bogus. There were no securities to back them. Did these two banks use
Stanchart’s money to buy certain securities, which were supposed to be in
the pipeline? No. So where did the money go? Did Bhupen have a hand in
the money disappearing? Bhupen states that he did not. He told RBI that “for

the first time, on 14 th May 1992, a statement was furnished to the board, of
outstanding BRs of the Bank of Karad.”
After some quick, preliminary interrogation, Stanchart discovered that the
money had passed from Hiten Dalal’s account to someone in the Bank of
Karad who had issued the BRs. The name? Abhay Narottam. Narottam, then
aged sixty, with an adopted seven-year-old son, was no stranger to Bhupen
Dalal. He had been Bhupen’s associate for the previous twenty-eight years.
He owed everything to him – his entire stock-broking career, including a
card at BSE. Narottam was also a director of Bank of Karad. Till September
1990, he held Bhupen’s power of attorney. The question Stanchart and CBI
found difficult to answer: How could Bhupen not know what Narottam was
up to?
Narottam was not the only one. Hiten Dalal, portly and around thirty-five,
is Bhupen’s nephew, albeit a distant one. The Janakiraman Committee would
reveal that Narottam was booking huge losses in securities transactions on
account of Hiten. The final link in the chain was JP Gandhi, a first cousin of
Bhupen Dalal. Gandhi has been an employee of Bhupen Champaklal
Devidas and by all accounts, was a master practitioner of the art of securities
transactions, especially those that fall in grey areas.
The fifth player was Teju Ruia who controlled a clutch of companies,
most notably Killick Nixon, in which Bhupen Dalal was a director. Bhupen,
in fact, helped him take over Killick Nixon. Ruia, who later admitted to
having taken Rs 90 crore – Rs 125 crore of Stanchart money, was one of
Bhupen’s closest business associates, their links extending even beyond
Indian shores. For his son’s wedding, Bhupen had borrowed Ruia’s Rolls
Royce. Very coincidentally, Ruia was a director of a tiny bank. The name?
Metropolitan Co-operative Bank. Investigations by Stanchart and the CBI
would later reveal how money flowed freely between them.
Clearly, the Metro Bank was being used as a conduit. But at least it had
some assets and had a business line of lending money to cloth merchants.
The other conduit controlled by Ruia was a dummy: Dhanraj Mills. It was a
mill only in name. With a capital of Rs 997,000 and a small office located in
the textile district of central Bombay, Dhanraj Mills’ main business was
milling cash for Ruia. It survived two attempts to liquidate it in 1958 and

1965. It sold some real estate for about Rs one crore with which Ruia bought
Killick Nixon through a hostile takeover in 1982. Since 1992, Ruia has been
living it up, like holding parties in London for his son’s wedding. Where did
he get all the money? Perhaps he earned it. But the Metro Bank was also
busy crediting cheques received from Karad and Hiten Dalal to Dhanraj
Mills’ account.
There was more to the nexus. Pradip Dharandharkar, a chartered
accountant, and KN Vyas were co-opted to the MCB board on 19 th March
1991. Both were managers in Killick Nixon. Dharandharkar quit late in 1992
while Vyas continued to work in the export depart-ment. Another key
suspect was the chairman of the Metro Bank, Hemant Vyas, about whom
The Indian Express , in a report of 31 st May 1992, said that he was about to
be booked under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of
Smuggling Act in 1987. Express alleged that he was rescued by the finance
minister, ND Tiwari, whom he calls Chacha Tiwari. The charge against Vyas
was that he was smuggling polyester yarn. Neither Tiwari nor Vyas denied
the story. Vyas pleaded ignorance about the decisions taken by the MCB
board.
So, as Stanchart saw it, the equation was pretty clear. Hiten Dalal,
Bhupen’s nephew, had taken hundreds of crores of rupees from the bank and
gave BRs supplied by Abhay Narottam, Bhupen’s close associate. More BRs
came from Metro Bank, indirectly controlled by Teju Ruia, Bhupen’s
business associate. Part of the money presumably went to JP Gandhi, an old
employee of Bhupen, and to Ruia. Caught in the middle of it all was
Bhupen, against whom there was no direct evidence. The press called him
the kingpin, the mastermind. Throughout the second half of May 1992,
Bhupen would feel the noose tightening around his neck. What would he do?
He had his answers ready. “Hiten is my cousin’s son. I have met him twice
in three years and that too on social occasions.” He said he had nothing to do
with the Bank of Karad. “After 27 th July last year (1991), when I became a
director, I haven’t visited the Bombay branch of Karad even once. Abhay
worked with me for twenty-eight years but we had little contact in the past
two years. JP Gandhi separated his business from ours in 1973. He was
sitting in our office doing some business of his own. He is getting old and

has no children. What are his interests?” And the man in the printed silk
shirt, hands in pockets, he encountered at the CBI office at Kitab Mahal? “I
had no clue that this was the same Hemant Vyas”, said Bhupen. Stanchart
was not impressed.
Bhupen railed against Stanchart for having falsely implicated him. About
Teju Ruia, he was silent. Ruia got himself admitted to a private hospital
when the scam broke while Bhupen had to cool his heels in jail. Bhupen
showed no bitterness. Neither did he want to enter into any discussion about
Abhay Narottam. Bhupen was also inconsistent. In a conversation with India
Today (31 st May issue), he said, “Our firm does not regularly deal in
securities. Some 15 years ago, we used to specialise in securities. But now
we have diversified, yet in the market we are known as securities
specialists.”
This was strange. His broking firm, BCD, was actually the second largest
securities broker. Between April 1991 and March 1992, BCD transacted
securities worth Rs 67,170 crore – more than Harshad Mehta’s Rs 61,318
crore. Of course, these figures, as produced by the Janakiraman Committee
were in a way misleading. But it did point to the fact that BCD was a big
player in the securities market. Besides, RBI officials soon discovered that
some 35% of Bank of Karad’s securities transactions were done by BCD. To
that, Bhupen Dalal told RBI it was “purely a decision of the executive
officers of the Bank of Karad through which broker it wishes to make
purchase/sale. I have never told Bank of Karad that its transactions in
securities should be done through BCD.”
Bhupen Dalal first joined the bank in 1969. On 15 th February 1984, he
had to leave the board because of the amendment to the Banking Regulation
Act. He automatically ceased to be a director, having served continuously for
eight years. Though rules allowed him to rejoin the board after two years, he
was reinstated on 27 th July 1991, after a gap of seven years. When RBI
pointed an accusing finger at him on the Bank of Karad deals, asking him to
step down on 25 th May 1992, Bhupen cleverly pointed out the RBI circular
of 9 th March which had specified the roles of directors of private sector
banks. “I have acted consistently within these norms. My interaction with
executive officers of the Bank of Karad was minimal.” He also pointed out,

quite logically, that he was just a non-executive director and “as per RBI
guidelines, was not supposed to participate in the day-to-day manage-ment
of the bank.” He then tellingly added, “The board also comprised a nominee
of the RBI” who, he implied, ought to have been equally liable.
Was Bhupen Dalal as innocent as that? He was certainly not new to the
world of securities transactions. In the earliest part of his career, between
1962 and 1976, he was deeply involved in securities dealings. The business
was different then. The chairman of a bank would often deal himself. “You
could meet the UTI chairman every day”, said Bhupen. “The rules were
stringent. Unless you had twenty years of experience, you could not sign
cheques. All cheques were supposed to be signed jointly.”
Then came the roaring ’80s. Securities transactions became huge. “The
junior grade officers were allowed to sign cheques. Even a single signatory
was all right”, he says. “Treasury departments of foreign banks were being
manned by youngsters with little experience. Controls went awry. Dealers
got a lot of leeway.” The irony is that Bhupen could say that about his own
securities broking firm, BCD that was virtually run by JP Gandhi. But the
big question remains – how much did he know? How much money passed
through his hands and did any of it stay with him?
The entire financial community reacted with stunned disbelief that
Bhupen Dalal could be involved in a fraud of such magnitude. As one of the
most voluble, articulate and innovative members of India’s financial
community and as the high-flying chairman of the Bombay-based
Champaklal Investment and Financial Consultants, he had positioned
himself as a merchant banker for non-resident Indians. But his name had got
linked to Bank of Karad, a sleepy and insignificant (or so everyone thought)
private bank, headquartered in distant Karad, a small town in the sugarcane
growing belt of Maharashtra.
The only son of Champaklal Devidas Dalal, Bhupen graduated from
Sydenham College in Bombay and then stepped into his father’s reputed and
well-established broking firm. Over the years, he had developed a
sophisticated business outlook which was reflected in the global dimension
he gave to his plans even when self-reliance, and not globalisation, was the
buzzword. He conceived and set up an offshore fund called Cifco-Hill

Samuel Fund at the time when India had just one domestic mutual fund
(UTI) and one offshore fund (India Fund) by the same UTI. Dalal also
started Cifco (UK) Ltd. Later he had set up Cifco Emirates, a unit in Dubai,
to advise NRIs on portfolio investments. Critics say that these were conduits
for laundering money but enforcement agencies got no proof of that.
Bhupen had curious Indian links. For instance, he used to visit Anna
Sardeshpande, his spiritual guru, living on the outskirts of Bijapur, several
times a month. Anna’s disciples – rich and powerful brokers, a few
bureaucrats and dozens of businessmen – came from all over the country.
Bhupen’s elder son Milan married the guru’s daughter.
Bhupen keeps every single visiting card he is given (the collection runs
into thousands). Addresses and contact numbers are meticulously stored. He
has an awful memory for names but a photographic recall for situations.
Bhupen, who never fails to return calls, had fax and telex machines installed
at home in the ’80s. He was known as a strategic thinker in a business
dominated by crude deal making. He once travelled all the way to London
just to lecture for an hour and a half at a seminar.
In the small financial community clustered in Bombay, Bhupen, born with
a silver spoon, played the role of a godfather. For instance, he helped R
Sankaran, his former employee and later chief of Stanchart’s merchant
banking division, set up an independent career, perhaps providing money
and office space. Numerous brokers and businessmen admit to having
received help from him – often free of cost. Among them was Udayan Bose,
one of the few non-Gujarati members of BSE. When Bose’s membership
was opposed by some directors, led by a prominent broker who went on to
become a president of BSE, Bhupen pulled his weight and steered it through.
At a meeting in 1991, Udayan openly called Bhupen his guru.
Hemendra Kothari, owner of DS Purbhoodas used to call Bhupen his guru
too, but in private. (It is another matter that Kothari extended no support to
Bhupen when the scam was exposed.) The story goes that Bhupen’s father
was the one who brought Kothari into the stock-broking business when he
was working as a deputy sales manager in the Morarjee Goculdas Mills.
Kothari’s father was about to close down the broking firm as he saw no
future in stock markets. Bhupen’s father prevailed on him to induct his son

into broking. Kothari, claim associates of Bhupen, used to sit in the BCD
office at Dalal Street for three hours every day to learn the ropes.
Bhupen is articulate, organised and, therefore, a great teacher and guide.
His sons, Asim and Milan, say that they have been trained in the “Bhupen
Dalal School of Management”. A few years ago, Bhupen took over a
medical shop near their home to teach hiss sons the art of running a
company. He converted the shop into a limited company to make his sons go
through the process of registering and running a firm under the Companies
Act and local laws. They would have regular board meetings, pass mock
resolutions and conduct general body meetings. Bhupen then sent his
younger son, Asim, to Hill Samuel, a small stock-broking firm in the UK,
for training.
Bhupen had it all planned out before the scam was exposed. Since the
rigid, state-controlled economic system gave him little leeway to use his
financial skills, he had meandered into other businesses in the late ’80s. He
bought Foods and Inn, a closed food company, which turned immensely
profitable under him by exporting products to the Middle East. In 1991, he
bought Swadeshi Stores, a dowdy department store and a landmark in
Bombay. His son Asim later converted it into a swank upmarket Bombay
Store. But once Narasimha Rao’s economic liberalisation was underway,
Bhupen was back to his first love, finance. He drew up big plans to make up
for lost time. Cifco conceived a mutual fund, a venture capital fund and
offices overseas. He certainly had all the contacts. Prime among them was
Aditya Birla.
The scam shattered it all. The rights issue of his flagship, Cifco, was
dropped, his BSE membership suspended and BCD debarred from doing any
securities trading.
But just as he had wondered aloud to Nat over the phone on 12 th May, the
big question remained unanswered for a long time. Where did the money
go? From this arose another nagging question. Why were RBI, CBI and
others not keen on hitting the Stanchart money trail, at least not as keen as
they had been to chase Harshad?

Chapter 10
Stanchart’s Money Trail
All this was a farce.
Stanchart was still
groping in the dark.
CBI appeared to lose
its way in a forest of
transactions. And the
Gang of Five looked
increasingly
comfortable. It
appeared
as if a cover-up had
begun.

WHERE did the Standard Chartered Bank money go? There were no clear
answers, just plenty of dark hints and tell-tale links between the Gang of
Five. Stanchart’s strategy was to approach the problem commercially: talk to
debtors, find out where the money had gone and get back as much of it as
possible. Following Pesi Nat’s phone call to Bhupen Dalal on 12 th May
1992, the bank and the Gang of Five sat through several long rounds of
discussions.
On 21 st May, Bhupen Dalal, Hiten Dalal, Pesi Nat and R Kannan met at
The Chambers, the exclusive club at the Taj Mahal hotel, to sort out the
mess. Their purpose that day was to fix the exact amount outstanding and
recoverable. Stanchart’s sums were: Rs 350 crore on account of BRs
accepted from Bank of Karad; Rs 400 crore on transac-tions linked to
Metropolitan Co-operative Bank with payment made to Bank of Karad; and
another Rs 550 crore routed through Metro Bank. The users of these funds?
Hiten Dalal: Rs 720 crore and Abhay Narottam, TB Ruia and JP Gandhi: Rs

580 crore collectively. That was a very rough estimate. Too rough to cope
with a deficit of such magnitude.
Bhupen Dalal took the lead in opening the meeting. “The scam will have
serious ramifications for India globally if Stanchart loses all this money. It is
in our interest to settle things amicably”, he said. As per Stanchart’s version,
which appeared more consistent, he also agreed to take responsibility for
Gandhi’s dues.
According to Stanchart’s internal documents, Hiten agreed to provide
additional security of Rs 160 crore made up of: shares in Reliance, Lakshmi
Machine Works, Pfizer, Bharat Forge (Rs 80 crore), debentures of Sandoz
and some other companies (Rs 10 crore) and mutual fund units like
Cantriple/Canstar (Rs 70 crore). He also agreed to trace IRFC bonds (Rs 120
crore) and “excess holding” of other bonds and BRs issued by the Bank of
America due through “unidentified transactions” (Rs 65 crore). In all, the
shares and bonds made up Rs 345 crore – Hiten’s share of the booty.
Over detailed discussions, Stanchart fixed some kind of payback schedule.
Hiten suggested that the Bank of Karad give Central Loans of Rs 155 crore
and Rs 125 crore of IDBI and ICICI bonds – a total of Rs 280 crore. He
agreed to trace Rs 185 crore of IRFC bonds and bonds from BankAm. He
was also supposed to bring in Rs 305 crore of shares/debentures, Rs 21 crore
of units and Rs 205 crore cash against the sale of Cantriple. The rest of the
money – Rs 350-450 crore – it was concluded, had been used to finance the
losses of other banks. Stanchart officials perhaps were used to writing off
certain losses. Later on, they filed claims against Canfina and Citibank to
recover some money.
The problem with this arrangement was that it was based comp-letely on
Hiten’s statements. Stanchart officials may have believed them. At that time,
hopes of a settlement were running high; several times a day they made
quick back-of-the-envelope calculations to work out how much the bank
would reclaim. But was Hiten in any position to speak the truth? Did he even
intend to? Bankers recount that Hiten never used to give a contract to back
up his transactions. Yet, the best and the biggest banks in the country,
especially foreign banks like Citibank, had done huge transactions with him.
Over the next few weeks, he repeatedly revised the figures.

Saturday, 23 rd May was crucial for Stanchart officials. They would be
able to assemble all the major characters, suspected to be directly or
indirectly involved in the swindle, for a long discussion at The Chambers.
But before that, in the morning, Rajah Banerjee, director of the India Task
Force, (Banerjee, a blunt, fidgety person with drooping eyes and a nearperfect British accent, was flown in two days after Nat called London for
reinforcements. He had been with the bank for 25 years) and R Kannan
would meet ND Parameshwaran, chief officer in RBI’s department of
banking operations and development at World Trade Centre in Cuffe Parade,
the southernmost tip of Bombay.

“What is Stanchart’s exposure to the scam, including unreconciled BRs?”
asked Parameshwaran, a tall, scraggy man with a lean profile and bushy
eyebrows, who looked more like a leftist union leader.
Stanchart was driven by two factors: first, the hope that the bank would
get its money back through negotiations and second, that at this sensitive
stage, discretion was important. So, when Prameshwaran asked the Stanchart
officials what the correct picture was, they ducked the issue. “There is a
large element of double counting”, they replied ambiguously.
Parameshwaran told them that the syndicate behind the Bank of Karad
consisted of five people – the names Stanchart already knew and with whom
Stanchart would have a brain storming session later in the day.

“All money first went to Narottam and from there to three-four accounts”,
said Parameshwaran.
A few more words and the meeting ended. It had lasted barely fifteen
minutes. Parameshwaran was rushing off to meet a deputy governor of RBI.
He left with a deep doubt in his mind: why wasn’t Stanchart more open
about its transactions?
At 4 p.m., all those involved in the murky Stanchart stream of the scam
met for a marathon four-hour session at The Chambers. Present were
Bhupen Dalal, Abhay Narottam, Hiten Dalal and Teju Ruia. Very
significantly, Gandhi, the man Hiten had identified as the mastermind, was

absent. Stanchart was represented by JR Heaton, Eric Naslund, Pesi Nat, R
Kannan and Wasseim Saifi.
Even before the discussion began, Bhupen, an extremely smooth and
forceful talker, made sure his role was clearly understood: “I am here due to
my association with the Bank of Karad and because Nat and Kannan have
requested me to arrive at a settlement.” Bhupen then referred to his similar
exercise with Canfina where Narottam and the others were present.
Canfina’s deficit had been assessed at around Rs 450 crore. The discussion
then veered to specific responsibilities.
Narottam admitted that his account at the Bank of Karad was used to route
receipts and payments of all of Hiten’s securities transactions. The method
was simple. Hiten would orally inform Narottam what to transfer where and
Narottam would convert that into written instructions for Bank of Karad.
What was Narottam’s interest?

“I got commissions for doing the routing”, said Narottam.
“Is that all?” asked Stanchart officials.
“Well, about Rs 30 crore has gone into a dairy at Nasik.” The dairy wasn’t
doing well so Stanchart had no hopes of recovering that money. They turned
to Teju Ruia who was apparently playing the good boy role. He admitted to
having taken between Rs 90 crore and 125 crore.
The width of that range was amazing. Here were seasoned businessmen
and brokers talking of hundreds of crores of supposedly missing money in a
manner as if it were loose change. More surprisingly, Narottam and Ruia had
different views on what those transactions were. Narottam said that they
were securities transactions done on behalf of Ruia. Certain losses had to be
added to it, which would explain the inflated figure. Ruia disagreed. They
were loans, he said, and later insisted that the figure was Rs 90 crore.

“I’ll pay it back”, he said. “But I want Canfina to be part of the
arrangement.”

Of course, he wasn’t going to suffer a loss. Ruia had an incredible strategy
of paying back the money: “I’ll get one of my companies to make a public
issue. I need about three months.” Perhaps he was hinting that Stanchart
could act as the merchant banker to this rob-Peter-to-pay-Paul public issue.
Halfway through the meeting – at six in the evening – Hiten was brought
in. He had a few explosive things to say. “Don’t pass the blame on to me.
They know what happened.” He was referring to Ruia, Narottam and
Bhupen.

“Have you lent any money?” asked Stanchart officials, “or lost it in the
market?”

“I haven’t lent any money. I have lost some in the market”, replied Hiten.
Later, Hiten pointed a finger at Narottam and said, “His account at the
Bank of Karad will show all payments. Ask him to hand over all the books
for a reconciliation.” It was probably one of the few reliable statements
Hiten had made to Stanchart. Bhupen then turned towards Hiten and said,
“You must turn over all your books to us. If you find it difficult to
understand your own transactions, we will bring in intermediaries. This has
to be settled amicably.” The intermediaries cited were Ajay Kayan and
Manoj Dhupelia, Calcutta brokers. Hiten indicated that Jitu Shroff, his
former employer, was acceptable to him. At that stage, with typical
expatriate arrogance, Naslund suggested that the bank fly in accountants
from the UK “to look into Narottam’s and Hiten’s books.”
Hiten admitted that he had delivered photocopies of the Nuclear Power
Corporation bonds instead of the original certificates. “I have given away the
originals to Canara Bank”, he admitted.
Through the whole meeting, it wasn’t clear what JP Gandhi’s role was. As
per the Stanchart version, Bhupen agreed to stand for Gandhi’s losses or
dues, insisting that he was not aware of what Gandhi’s connections were.
But later, Bhupen denied this. “All I said was I will stand behind Gandhi”,
he claimed.

Bhupen then advised Narottam, Hiten and Ruia to settle with Stanchart
because unlike the public sector banks, Stanchart would be commercially
flexible.
At the end of the meeting, Stanchart wanted to inspect Narottam’s books.
It claimed that Bhupen and Narottam resisted the idea. Later, Narottam
relented. Kannan told Narottam, “Can you call up your staff and tell them to
keep the books ready?” As soon as Kannan said this, apparently one among
the Gang of Five was seen making a call, perhaps to Narottam’s office. The
meeting was over and while lounging outside, Hiten passed a stray
comment: “Now the battle is between the big fish and the small fry.”
After the meeting, Wasseim Saifi and Iyer went to Narottam’s office at
Vardan Chambers near the stock exchange. It was locked. At 11 in the night,
one Stanchart official reached there with a bodyguard to catch Narottam in
case he attempted to remove any books. He found nothing suspicious. The
next day was Sunday. Stanchart kept a vigil on Narottam’s offices but
discovered nothing.
A couple of days later, Narottam got himself admitted to Bachha’s nursing
home, opposite Churchgate station. His relatives said that he was in a state
of deep shock and on the verge of a nervous breakdown. They feared for his
life, they said. They gave the wrong name and address of the nursing home
and it was learnt later that they had exaggerated Narottam’s condition.
Even as Stanchart was negotiating with Bhupen and his gang, it was
exploring ways to get the CBI involved in the investigation with a minimum
of fuss. CBI was reluctant. So, Stanchart started pulling all strings. It
managed to contact G Ramaswamy, the powerful attorney general of the
government of India. On 24 th May, he put in a request to Vijay Karan,
director of the CBI, to set up a meeting between his department and
Stanchart officials. Karan agreed.
At 12.30 p.m. on 25 th May, at Karan’s office in the ministry of home
affairs at North Block, Karan and the CBI super sleuth
K Madhavan, met Naslund and Kannan of Stanchart. Also present were K
Jaybharat Reddy, acting chairman of National Housing Bank and joint

secretary (banking). Karan opened the meeting by referring to Ramaswamy’s
request to CBI to devote some time to Stanchart’s problems.

“Unfortunately, CBI’s jurisdiction is restricted to public sector banks.
Besides, it has limited resources.” But he invited Madhavan to suggest ways
by which Stanchart’s case could be included.
Madhavan was reluctant. Then Jaybharat Reddy spoke.

“May be the public interest of the Stanchart depositors can form the basis
for CBI to intervene”, he said. This line of argument failed to find favour
with the others.
Karan and Madhavan then jointly suggested that the bank take the
following steps: First, prepare a case in consultation with a Bombay-based
criminal lawyer. Second, lodge a formal complaint with Ramamurthy,
Commissioner of Police, Bombay, and send a copy of that to Madhavan.
Third, take RBI’s assistance. Madhavan promised to keep in touch with Nat,
Kannan and Derrick Reed and help in any way he could.
Meanwhile, Jaybharat Reddy complained that nobody from the Stanchart
management had met him even once in the past year. He was referring to the
case where the Bank of Baroda, in which he was a director, passed its annual
accounts, though it had an outstanding BR from Stanchart for Rs 50 crore. It
wasn’t clear why Reddy mentioned this in a meeting called basically to get
the CBI to take up Stanchart’s case.
Stanchart also kept up its discussions with Parameshwaran. At 10 in the
morning on 28 th May, Naslund and Kannan stepped into Parameshwaran’s
office. They referred to Nat’s request to involve Stanchart’s officers in RBI’s
investigations to verify the Bank of Karad’s and Andhra Bank’s transactions.

“That will be unwise”, said Parameshwaran. He felt that a regulatory
authority like RBI associating with officers of one particular bank would
encourage bad publicity. RBI would be accused of being partisan, and that
too, towards a foreign bank.

“Why don’t you give me the list of suspected transactions?” he asked the
two Stanchart officers. “On my part I will be collecting paid cheques and
vouchers of Karad’s transactions and those related to the other banks.”
Kannan and Naslund were satisfied. They were also keen to get leads on
where the money had gone. On this, Parameshwaran’s comment was telling.

“Some of the money has been used by other banks for rollover or squaring
up past deals”, he said. Later, Hiten would say the same thing in a different
fashion to Stanchart officials. But this trail was eventually never pursued.

“Is anything being done about the Canfina transactions?” asked the
Stanchart officials.

“I will speak to Canara Bank and start joint action”, said Parameshwaran.
He asserted again and again that he was keen on getting to the bottom of the
whole matter. And he had one piece of advice: “Register all your claims and
pursue them.”
While Stanchart was carrying on a dialogue with CBI, the RBI and the
Gang of Five, it was developing a strange relationship with Hiten, a key
figure in the securities scandal. On surface, it would appear that the
relationship was fairly cordial after the scam was exposed. On 11 th May,
Hiten wrote to Stanchart which had assessed its shortfall to be Rs 1253 crore
8
of securities. If the tone of Hiten’s letter is any indication, he was in a mood
to co-operate:
Even whilst you are continuing with the
process of reconciliation in ascertaining
the exact position and further, whilst I am
endeavouring to give you physical
deliveries of physical stocks and/or bank
receipts for the above shortfalls
identified, I have delivered to you the
stocks, shares and debentures, etc. as
listed in the annexure. I will be delivering
to you further shares, stocks, debentures,
which will be listed separately... by way

of security towards the above shortfall
and/or further shortfalls which may be
ascertained... I further agree to keep you
indemnified against any loss... eventually
upon
completion
of
the
final
reconciliation... I further agree and
confirm to
execute such other
documents... that the Bank may require to
give effect to the above.
The compromising tone of the letter is, however, completely misleading.
Hiten wrote to Stanchart again on 27 th May, not only retracting whatever he
had declared but charging Stanchart with threat, coercion and much else.
According to him, on 18 th May, Ravi Iyer forced him to write/sign the letter
backdated to 11 th May. Here is the dramatic story in his own words,
reproduced from his 27 th May letter, including all the typographical errors:
Your Mr Ayyer insisted on my attending
the his office along with my blank letter
heads in connection with the problems of
reconciliation that you were facing.
Accordingly on 18-5-92, I was in his
office when some of my blank letter
heads were taken by him and the letter
dated 11-5-92 along with two other letters
which were dated 12-5-92 and 13-5-92
were drafted, prepared and got typed by
your official in your office and presented
to me for my signature. I was not willing
to sign them as the same contained
numerous incorrect statements but I was
threatened that unless I signed them,
Standard Chartered would involve me by
criminal prosecutions against me and
have me arrested and ruin me. In the
circumstances, I who was all alone was
compelled to sign the said letters under

threat, duress and coercion. In the
meantime, on 9 th /11 th May under threat
of criminal prosecution arrest and
harassment, your Mr Ayyar forced me
hand over to you a pile of shares and
stocks which he stated would be returned
back to me at the earliest. In the said
letter at item 4 securities of the value of
Rs 45 crore covered by BR.’s received by
you but alleged to be missing from your
records.
Hiten went on to assert that he had merely acted as the broker for
Stanchart, keeping it informed of the names of buyers and sellers. For
several transactions, Abhay Narottam had acted as the broker for the Metro
Bank and the Bank of Karad. Stanchart had accepted the BRs of these two
banks and made the payments directly to them. Writes Hiten:
I acted as your broker only. No question
therefore arises of my being liable or
responsible for payments in respect of
these transactions and/or the alleged
shortfall claimed by you. I was not bound
to furnish any shares and deben-tures as
and by way of security… Please treat the
said letters bearing dates 11/5/92, 12/5/92
and 13/5/92 as cancelled… Please also
return the said shares and securities which
have wrongly detained by you...
Stanchart then played what Hiten feels was a nasty little trick. He had
given four cheques to Stanchart – two of December 1991, one of February
and another of March 1992. The bank presented them in May, at the height
of its dispute with Hiten, and the cheques bounced. On Sunday, 31 st May,
Stanchart called Hiten to its office for discussions and handed over a legal
notice to him seeking to prosecute him. Hiten says he was shocked.

In his letters of 8 th and 15 th June, he claims that he had repeatedly
requested the bank to hold the cheques pending various adjustments. The
cheques were not supposed to have been presented. Indeed, why did the
bank take five months to present the last cheque, which was dated 24 th
December? “Such a long delay of depositing the cheque of such a huge
amount has not been explained by you as indeed there can be no
explanation”, wrote Hiten. Hiten was later convicted in this case.
Strangely, this war of letters did not prevent the bank officials and Hiten
from sitting together and sipping cups of coffee, discussing the money trail.
At 4.30 in the afternoon of 1 st June, Hiten met a set of Stanchart officials,
including Saifi who wrote the minutes. Hiten revealed a great deal, which
was later turned over to the CBI. For instance, he said that Bhupen,
Narottam and Gandhi were working together as a group, which had created
the big hole in Stanchart. He traced the problem back to mid-1991 – just
around the time of the Parliament elections. This was how the question-andanswer session went:

“JP Gandhi approached me to sell units to Stanchart. Bank of Karad
would provide the BRs.”

“But where did the money go?” asked Stanchart officials. Hiten had only
part of the story.

“The money was needed to plug a hole created by this group in either
Bank of India or Allahabad Bank whose former chairman was apparently
close to Bhupen Dalal.”
Did the money go only from Stanchart?

“Even LIC (Life Insurance Corporation) Mutual Fund may have a gap in
its portfolio.”
Who was Hiten dealing with?

“Abhay Narottam was the broker in all transactions with other banks. He
had the power of attorney of Bhupen Dalal till October 1991. He may have

been paid a commission for acting as a front.”
Who were the beneficiaries?

“JP Gandhi was the brain behind the whole thing. But he would not have
used the money. Bhupen Dalal and Teju Ruia were the beneficiaries. Bhupen
dealt with various business houses like the Birlas but Teju Ruia was closest
to him. JP Gandhi told me to contact Ruia for all Karad deals in Gandhi’s
absence.”
Hiten told Stanchart about Teju Ruia’s lavish lifestyle. “He recently
celebrated his son’s marriage over fifteen days.”
Has part of the money gone overseas?
Hiten was now shooting in the dark. “Bhupen has a lot of NRI
connections which could have made it easy for him to transfer the money
overseas.” Hiten also asserted that other than the gaps in Canfina and
Stanchart, nothing else in the scam could be attributed to him.
On the most crucial question of where the money had gone, Hiten had a
very interesting answer:

“JP Gandhi and the others would have used about Rs 600 crore – he
doesn’t know how. Another Rs 400-450 crore have been used to fund the
losses of other banks and the rest, about Rs 300 crore, are in my account.”
Stanchart had already picked up securities worth
Rs 350 crore from Hiten, which he claims in his letter, were meant to be
returned to him.
In the presence of Stanchart officials, that afternoon, Hiten was in a mood
to repent. Did he realise that what he had done was unpardon-able? “Yes”,
said Hiten. Knowing how devious he was, Stanchart officials were far from
satisfied.
On 10 th June, Hiten was called to Stanchart and interrogated by HH
Garrick and Chong Wang Leong of Stanchart’s Group Security. The
interview started at 5 in the evening in the temporary security office and

ended at 6.15. Stanchart was still groping in the dark. The minutes of that
meeting say it all. The bank was still trying to “identify a starting point of
asset tracing”, establish Hiten’s relationship with the bank, and get
information on staff collusion and possible bribery.

“Hiten Dalal is a singularly unimpressive character and certainly not one
that would be normally associated with a successful broker”, says
Stanchart’s internal document, recording the meeting. Hiten had been
evasive throughout the interview. Whenever the bank officials tried to pin
him on specific transactions, he had a stock reply: “I will have to check the
records, which my wife and I are reconciling. The process would take
another week or so.” What he did not add, and what a firm of detectives
employed by Stanchart found out, was that Hiten and his wife were also
burning their books.
Hiten had been dealing with Stanchart for over ten years. He confirmed
that he had done well for himself all those years. His Stanchart connection
started when he was with VB Desai and continued when he struck out on his
own in 1988. The rest of the interview was revealing.
Who did he deal with in the bank?
Only the dealers.
Did Stanchart release money before getting the securities?
Yes.
How many times did this happen?
Not too often.
Was the bank carrying positions in its own books on behalf of Hiten?
Yes.
What was the arrangement?

Hiten had agreed to a 15% yield for the year ended May. But then the
market flattened out and he told Stanchart that for the coming year there
would be no fixed yield.
Did he discuss this with anybody in the senior management like chairman
Pesi Nat or executive director R Kannan?
He had never met them except at the annual Stanchart brokers’ party.
Hiten also told the Stanchart interrogators that he had bailed out the bank
on two occasions when it had long positions and he was short.
Why did he help Stanchart?
Hiten could give no reasons.
Did he have any social contacts with the bank staff or the dealers?
None, except the annual brokers’ party.
Had he ever offered favourable rates or information to the bank?
No.

“I have been deceived and used by others”, said Hiten.
“What do you mean?” asked the Stanchart interrogators.
“I had trusted Bank of Karad... JP Gandhi and Abhay Narottam. I never
realised that they won’t deliver the securities. The bank’s dealers were
pressing for deliveries since January.”

“Would you have been able to deliver under normal circumstances?”
“I would have definitely got the stock back by May, the normal month of
reconciliation”, asserted Hiten.
Under Stanchart’s interrogation, Hiten turned philosophical. “He seemed
resigned to his fate”, notes Stanchart’s minutes. “He claims he won’t run

away from the problem.”
What would he do now?

“I would like to continue as a broker”, he said. And then after a pause
added, “though I know nobody will trust me now.”
At 5 p.m. on 2 nd June, Stanchart officials went to GV Ramakrishna,
chairman of SEBI, who promised to help them in any way he could. His
specific suggestion: “Take the help of Interpol.” Apparently, a lot of people
were convinced that money had been stashed away abroad. Ramakrishna,
then a sixty-three-year-old bureaucrat with a penchant for armchair
investigation, had no definite information but his suspicions were strong.
Stanchart made other attempts at a settlement. One of the persons
involved early in the negotiations was HT Parekh, former chairman of ICICI
and the father figure of the financial sector. It is strange how both Bhupen
Dalal and Stanchart queued separately for help at the doorstep of an eightyone-year-old man who was far removed from scam.
By the middle of May, the needle of suspicion was pointing at Bhupen’s
associates, Narottam, Gandhi and Ruia. Bhupen got on to the phone to clear
his name. He was frantically calling up every person he knew to help him
meet the finance minister, Manmohan Singh and commerce secretary
Montek Singh Ahluwalia. One of the calls he made was to Dev Ahuja,
formerly with Citibank and who thereafter started a financial services
company, 20th Century Finance. Ahuja suggested that Bhupen contact
Deepak Parekh, managing director of HDFC.
Bhupen called Deepak on a Sunday. Deepak was reluctant to make any
commitments. Bhupen was desperate.

“Nobody is willing to meet me”, said Bhupen. Can you fix someone for
me in Delhi?”
Deepak deftly shrugged him off. “I am a small man”, he said. “I can’t help
you meet anyone.” Bhupen kept trying.

“Can HT Parekh help?” he asked.
“Why don’t you speak to him yourself?” returned Deepak.
Bhupen was scared sick of the imminent CBI arrest. But he had a more
immediate worry. As the bare details of the massive scam at Stanchart
started dribbling out, SEBI turned the heat on the BSE to suspend the scamtainted brokers. Bhupen was one, operating through two companies, BCD
and Ramdas & Co. With CBI’s shadow looming over him, Bhupen was
desperate to stop at least BSE from suspending him. Unknown to Bhupen,
Nat had already knocked at HT Parekh’s door.
In the third week of May, Nat got a call from the RBI governor. He went
alone to meet him. That was strange because for all other meetings, he had
been accompanied by David Brougham, a director on Stanchart’s board. A
few days later, Brougham and Nat were back together at the governor’s
office. “Talk to HT Parekh”, the governor said. “He may have a solution for
you.” What made the governor suggest this?
The late HT Parekh, who had been advisor to the LIC during the Haridas
Mundhra scandal, knew the financial markets inside out, was familiar with
all the market players and commanded a great deal of respect from them.
Seen as a practical and honest man and immune to pressure, he could have
possibly seen a solution. He had no stakes and knew the finance minister
well. Before the scam, Parekh had also met Harshad to see he would
contribute to a charity organisation. Harshad was keener on talking about his
cars.
HT Parekh had started his career with Harkissondas Lakshmidas, one of
the biggest brokers in Bombay, operating in the same league as BCD, owned
by Bhupen’s Dalal’s father, for whom Parekh had great respect. “He was the
king in the securities market”, he recalls. Parekh was less close to Bhupen,
however. “He is different. He is very clever”, is all Parekh would say.
In the third week of May, Parekh agreed to meet Nat as he wanted to
know about Stanchart’s involvement. He wasn’t too impressed by Nat’s
replies to his questions. Nat had referred to the Rs 300 crore of securities
that Stanchart had seized from “them” (meaning Hiten). “Bhupen is in the

picture”, Parekh told Nat. “Part of the money may have gone outside the
country. You have got Rs 300 crore but won’t get another Rs 300 crore
without lodging a complaint.” (Nat reported this to his senior colleagues in
Stanchart.) But how did Parekh say all this? Had he at some stage asked
Bhupen to settle the amount? And how did he know the figure?
Very coincidentally, several unconnected persons, including Dev Ahuja,
had been referring to a figure of Rs 400 crore. Stanchart officials pencilled it
in their countless calculations of recoveries. At least two brokers had heard
of that figure. In short, Bhupen’s responsibility was being assessed at Rs 400
crore though there was simply no basis for it. But what did Parekh actually
tell Bhupen at their first meeting?

“I am innocent”, Bhupen pleaded. “I have not signed anything.” Parekh
thought a deal could be struck. “Put some money on the table first”, he told
Bhupen. The next day when Bhupen called him again, Parekh said, “I would
like to see you with the Chartered Bank officials.” Later, to buttress his
claim of innocence, Bhupen sent a brief note detailing the Stanchart case. On
the other side, Nat kept Parekh’s advice of filing an FIR in mind, pressing
him at the same time, to arbitrate. Three days after his meeting with Nat,
Parekh agreed to sit in on the tripartite meeting.
A few days later, Brougham, Pesi Nat, Bhupen and Parekh assem-bled at
The Chambers for a settlement. Like all meetings involving Bhupen, this too
ended nowhere. “I don’t have the money. I am not involved”, he repeated.
Bhupen may have talked about a settlement to Parekh earlier but now, in a
formal meeting with the Stanchart officials, he balked. He clammed up
completely. “Brougham was very keen on a settlement”, says Kannan. “He
would have grabbed if there was any deal in sight.” But Bhupen was
obviously giving no quarter. But that was not the end of negotiations.
Brougham made another attempt.
Around 5 th June, Stanchart got an inkling that CBI may, after all, look
into the scam. Nat, Brougham, Bhupen and Kannan met for one last time, at
the Belvedere Club at the Oberoi hotel. It was the last meeting Brougham
attended in India, and the first one which he conducted himself, abandoning
his earlier role of an onlooker.

He opened the meeting with an ominous announcement: “If we don’t
arrive at a settlement within the next twenty-four hours, we will go to the
CBI.” Stanchart had played its card. The last one. One that could shake
Bhupen up. The ignominy of spending not a few hours but maybe weeks in
jail... CBI’s rough questioning... But Bhupen was unmoved. Brougham
pressed on.
He looked straight into Bhupen’s eyes. “The others are pointing a finger at
you. You will have to take charge of the recoveries”, he said.
Bhupen ignored that. He went for a counterattack, his usual strategy right
through his three weeks of negotiations with Stanchart and afterwards. He
attacked Stanchart where it hurt most — their own lack of checks and
balances. He pointed out specific transactions where Stanchart’s weaknesses
were glaring.

“Let’s not talk of specific transactions anymore”, said Kannan. “Let’s talk
of money.” Bhupen side-stepped that.
Brougham gave up. In all, the meeting lasted about fifteen minutes.
Bhupen’s stand hadn’t changed an inch. Stanchart had no more cards to play.
It would have to file a complaint with the CBI. A little while later,
Brougham left to pack his bags and Bhupen headed home.
Around the same time, Kannan had a revealing conversation with one of
the major players in the scam. “Bhupen is perhaps clean after all”, said this
person. He was impressed by Bhupen’s strong, consistent stance of
innocence. “I have decided to stand up and take responsibility for whatever
happens”, Kannan was told. “What will you do?”

“We are talking of a fraud here and I am not going to take responsibility
for that”, said Kannan. “If it was a mistake I would have owned it up. But
80% of the problem here is dealing-room fraud and the rest is collusion in
the back office. I know I have not been a part of the problem but I can at
least be a part of the solution.”

“Yes, the bank sees your value in that.” Then suddenly Kannan was
offered a bait. “Why don’t you set up your own shop here?” asked this

person. “Like Sankaran.”
Like Sankaran? The same R Sankaran who was the merchant banking
chief in Stanchart and whom Kannan replaced later? Who had earlier
worked for Bhupen’s firm, Champaklal Investment and Finance before
moving to Stanchart? The same Sankaran who was calling people at
midnight to harangue for hours about Bhupen’s innocence? Sankaran was
also a distant cousin of Kannan but the two were not exactly the best of
friends. Kannan grew curious.

“I have analysed myself thoroughly. I may be good in a job but not in
running my own business”, he explained. “I am a little more entrepreneurial
than the others but I certainly don’t want to run my own business. I want to
be here for a few more months, find a solution and leave.”
Strangely, the other person refused to give up. He pointed out how
successful Sankaran has been. And then he dropped the bombshell. “Why, if
you ask Bhupen he may give you Rs 10-15 lakh. He has helped a lot of
people.”Kannan’s jaw dropped. The very next day Stanchart was going to
file a suit against someone and here he was offered the bait of borrowing
money from the same person for starting his own venture.
The next day Stanchart officials were in Madhavan’s office. But strangely,
the FIR was filed a full fortnight later, on the 20 th . There were two reasons.
First, with its limited resources, CBI was still not confident of taking up the
case of a foreign bank, especially one that wasn’t willing to disclose
everything. The second was Madhavan’s cautious style of working,
influenced by his legal background.
Over that fortnight, Stanchart officials trooped down to Madhavan’s office
at least thrice, where the supersleuth would cross a ‘t’ and dot an ‘i’ of the
FIR. After every round of correction, Madhavan would ask Stanchart to take
back the draft FIR. He did not want the court to know that CBI was acting in
collusion with the complainant, as Stanchart’s case would then get weaker.
After a couple of meetings, Madhavan called a CBI officer, SG Gadhe, and
again made further corrections. A few days later, Madhavan, being
increasingly alienated within CBI itself for his publicity-conscious ways,
scheduled another meeting. In that, he included not only Gadhe but one more

CBI officer, Sambhariya. Finally, at 9.30 on the morning of 20
FIR was filed.

th

June, the

Over the next few days, the entire Gang of Five and its satellites, except
Teju Ruia, were arrested. Ruia suspiciously took refuge in the Bombay
Hospital to escape CBI’s interrogation. All those arrested were released on
bail after one month. But all this was a farce. Stanchart was still groping in
the dark, hurting itself by a disastrous public-relations strategy. CBI
appeared to lose its way in a forest of transactions. And the Gang of Five
looked increasingly comfortable. It appeared as if a cover-up had begun.
Subsequently, Stanchart went on a legal offensive. It sued Hiten Dalal for
the four bounced cheques. It also sued Citibank in New York for Rs 117
crore and planned to sue ANZ Grindlays Bank and BankAm for about Rs
335 crore at Melbourne and San Francisco, respectively. In all, Stanchart
filed twenty-four recovery claims against ten banks and mutual funds to
recover Rs 990 crore. Those sued included NHB, Andhra Bank, Andhra
Bank Finance Services, Canbank Mutual Fund, Canfina, State Bank of
Patiala and Karur Vysya Bank.

Most of these were shots in the dark.

Chapter 11
Superbanker
He ran through the
thicket of regulations
that separate
opportunity from
profits by striking
dubious deals with a
ragbag of characters
from politics,
business and
government. In the
process, he created a
generation of clones
who swore by his
leadership and
imbibed his style.

IT was the middle of June 1992 and Harshad Mehta’s heist and the
Stanchart stream of the scam were fully out in the open. Around that time
the RBI governor’s antennae had caught another signal that would become
the third dimension of the scam. He was tipped off that Fairgrowth Financial
Services, an upstart company started by the late B Ratnakar, former
chairmban of Canara Bank, was in trouble. Fairgrowth had borrowed money
from Andhra Bank but was finding it difficult to repay. The governor called
KR Nayak, chairman of Andhra Bank.

“What is your exposure to Fairgrowth?”
Nayak feigned ignorance. “We have no exposure to Fairgrowth.”

A few days later the governor called again, more certain this time. He
repeated the question and asked in addition, “Are you fully covered by
securities?”

“Yes”, said Nayak.
“Are you holding any Securities Receipts issued by Fairgrowth?”
enquired the governor pointedly.
Nayak claimed that Andhra Bank Financial Services (ABFSL) was
holding sufficient physical securities with a market value good enough to
cover the money Fairgrowth had borrowed. He lied.
In reality, ABFSL, a fully-owned subsidiary of Andhra Bank, was deeply
in hock having borrowed money from public sector units and lent it out to
Fairgrowth. The sum was staggering and Fairgrowth was struggling to return
it.
Meanwhile the RBI executive director in charge of non-banking financial
services, SS Tarapore, got into the act. He knew K Dharmapal, managing
director of Fairgrowth, well. He asked him if there was any problem.
Dharmapal denied that there was. But Tarapore noticed that he was uneasy.
In the next few weeks, Fairgrowth emerged as the third strand of the scam
after Harshad Mehta and Stanchart. In some ways it was more startling,
exposing the high profile, go-getting commerce minister, P Chidambaram,
and the Planning Commission member, V Krishnamurthy.
The story of Fairgrowth starts with its founder, B Ratnakar, who died on 2
February 1992 at the age of 56, just three months before the scam
surfaced. To some observers, the Fairgrowth scam was inevitable.
Fairgrowth was a dangerous combination of its risk-taking promoter, the
scorching pace he set for his protégés and the dynamic equity market of
1991-92. Ratnakar, judging by his track record, couldn’t have done it any
other way. His life makes a compelling story.
nd

He raced upwards in his 32-year career at Canara Bank to become, at 46,
the youngest chairman and managing director of a public sector bank. He ran
through the thicket of regulations that separate opportunity from profits by

striking dubious deals with a varied set of characters drawn from politics,
business and the government. In the process, he created a whole generation
of Ratnakar-clones who swore by his leadership and imbibed his style of
functioning. It was the pervasive influence of this style that indirectly
perpetrated the scam.
Ratnakar was the eldest of nine children of an impoverished ticket agent at
Sagar district in Karnataka. A free hostel accommodation in Mysore and a
generous principal who paid the examination fees, helped him graduate.
Until he was selected to join the bank, young Ratnakar had never worn a pair
of trousers. His standard attire was white pyjamas worn with a shirt. Deep
inside him, Ratnakar had a burning desire to make a mark. This took him
through five distinct phases in his banking career: his stint in Bombay where
he tasted early success, his break in Delhi, extraordinary recognition in
Madras, back to bigger things in Delhi that propelled him to final stardom at
Bangalore, at the Canara Bank headquarters, when he became the chairman.
Barely two years after he had joined the bank, Ratnakar opted to work in
Bombay “because the sheer size of the metropolis presents a far larger
canvas and provides for the development of vision”, he said later. He spent
the first year and a half practically living in the bank. He would sleep on the
bank counters at night, find time to appear for his banking examinations
(CAIIB) and study Hindi and Sanskrit simultaneously.
Around the same time he married Prema, the niece of C Srinivasa Rao, a
director who had inducted Ratnakar into the bank. Ratnakar’s father worked
for Gajanana Transport Company owned by Prema’s father. Rao, who
treated Ratnakar like a son, arranged the marriage. He even lent him Rs 5000
to buy jewellery and clothes for his family in preparation for the wedding.
While in Bombay, Ratnakar pioneered the house-to-house canvassing of
deposits which “in those days big bankers felt it below their dignity to do”,
he said. Within two years, at the age of twenty-four, Ratnakar had become
the youngest manager in the bank. But this was just the beginning. “After a
thumping success in branches in Bombay, when I could have rested on my
laurels, there was an offer for people to go to the North to start branches.
There were no takers, but I offered to go Delhi”, recalled Ratnakar. At
twenty-seven, he took up the challenge to set up the bank’s first branch in

the capital where he learned the fine art of doing business in India. Though a
young stripling, clueless about how the city operated, he soon created a wide
network of contacts with powerful bureaucrats, chiefs of public sector
companies and favour-dispensing politicians – all eager to cut a deal.
In the next five years, he set up four branches, which was perhaps too fast
a growth. He was shunted off to Madras. “I felt like Field Marshal
Maneckshaw who was dismissed by Krishna Menon but came back as Army
chief”, he said later.
Ratnakar’s achievements in Madras were truly outstanding. He himself
said proudly, in an interview with Shreyas , the bank’s in-house magazine, “I
did not know a single person there. From such a situation to reach a stage
where people started talking about me, I consider a great achievement.” At
the Mount Road branch, he took deposits from Rs 1.5 crore to Rs 26.10
crore in just three years. This single branch accounted for 8% of the total
bank deposits in Madras city. It was also the largest branch in the four
southern states. “The success was poignant for me because I was transferred
out of Delhi in anger, and after this, I had to be transferred back, in a higher
capacity”, Ratnakar told Shreyas .
During his stint in Madras, the bank used to offer Rs 100 as an incentive
to officers for every lakh of deposit brought in. Halfway through 1972, it
withdrew the scheme, because Ratnakar had clawed in so much, that they
would have had to pay him a whopping Rs 2 lakh as incentive. Instead, the
bank awarded Rs 25,000 to the branch.
As a regional manager, divisional manager and deputy general manager at
Delhi he expanded the network from 25 branches to 106 and deposits from
Rs 21 crore to Rs 248 crore. As an extrovert he also developed, during this
period, a wide network of contacts among politicians and businessmen. In
two short jumps he became joint general manager and then, in September
1981, executive director. On 30 th June 1982, he became the chief of Canara
Bank – the youngest ever among public sector banks.
Ratnakar was full of innovative ideas, which he articulated effect-ively
through steady, uninterrupted chatter. “If five people were in a room with
him, the others hardly got to speak. Of course, he was a captivating

speaker”, recalled Vijay Dhar, son of late DP Dhar who was once a top
Congress politician close to Indira Gandhi. His supreme confidence,
bordering on bragging, a desire to be at the centre stage, and his inability to
accept criticism or dissent sometimes irked people. But Ratnakar’s chief
feature was his burning ambition.
ND Prabhu, who succeeded him as chairman, says that Ratnakar’s vision
was not a dream but a precise goal. As early as 1958, at the age of twentytwo, just two years after he joined the bank as an apprentice, Ratnakar
shocked Prabhu by boasting that he could become the chairman. Once he
actually got there, in 1982, he set himself up in competition with SBI, not in
terms of deposits – which he considered a misleading yardstick – but raw
profits and innovations. This generated fierce competition between him and
DN Ghosh, the chairman of SBI.
The two had completely contrasting styles but were obsessed with each
other, according to brokers closely in touch with both. Any conversation
they started would switch within minutes to discussing each other’s moves.
Ghosh disliked Ratnakar’s bravado and Ratnakar believed that RBI was
unfairly scuttling his ideas and innovations in preference for Ghosh’s.
Despite the supposed disadvantage, Ratnakar caught up with SBI with
alarming speed. In June 1982, Canara Bank had Rs 15 crore of capital and
reserves. Six years later this had swollen to Rs 241.50 crore – the highest
among nationalised banks other than SBI.
In 1987, his last full year as chairman, the dynamic Ratnakar, by then
dubbed Superbanker, launched credit cards and set up three subsidiaries –
Canbank Financial Services, Canbank Mutual Fund and Can Fin Homes.
Canara Bank had grabbed every opportunity with amazing speed while being
driven by management dictums like “targets are barriers to creativity
because they are based on the past.” In 1987, Canara Bank, which was a
fraction of SBI’s size, showed a profit of Rs 45 crore, losing by a whisker to
SBI’s Rs 45.5 crore profit. But Canfina had squarely beaten SBI Capital
Markets and CanMutual, after a shaky start, raced ahead to create new
records.
KM Baliga, who first met Ratnakar in 1969 and then went on to become
his right-hand man in the chairman’s office in New Delhi, narrated how

Ratnakar challenged SBI’s lock on the banking business of the public-sector
companies. These companies, as per government guidelines, were obliged to
bank with the public sector banks. “He used to tell the public sector
companies and their parent ministries that SBI is not even 100%
government-owned – 3% of its shares are privately held. Canara Bank is
totally government-owned. So, as per the guideline, Canara Bank should get
a preference.” Such logic and persuasive powers fetched several plum
accounts.
These examples show his direct contribution. But Ratnakar’s more
pervasive contribution, his true legacy, was in picking up promising men like
Dharmapal and R Kannan and lighting a fire in their belly. These men have
performed for him in commercial banking, merchant banking and mutual
funds, returning the compliment with steadfast personal and professional
loyalty. Ratnakar’s success in inspiring a generation of top performers in a
highly regulated set-up must rank as one of the most notable managerial
successes.
Ratnakar believed in “hierarchy for administration and equality for
contribution.” This was a brilliant way of injecting incentives into a rigid
system. To promising employees, he gave challenging assignments,
bypassing their seniors. Simultaneously, he observed the hierarchical
structure including scales of pay, thereby keeping everyone happy. Ratnakar
also managed to inspire fierce loyalty among his subordinates by working
with them, thrusting them into challenges and often finding solutions for
them. Here is an example.
On an overcast day in July 1984 R Kannan, manager in the merchant
banking division of Canara Bank, was on his way from Bombay to Delhi to
sort out a knotty problem with the Controller of Capital Issues. Roche, an
unlisted company, was bringing its stake down to 74% as per the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act. To do that, it needed to sell 14% of its equity to
the public. But as per law, no company with less than 20% public holding
could be listed. But Canara Bank, which was handling this unique case,
decided to file an application, never-theless, with a provision to cancel the
issue if the permission did not come through.

As Kannan reached the airport, he saw Ratnakar waiting in the queue for
the Bangalore flight. Kannan briefly explained the case to him. In Delhi,
Kannan discussed the case with a junior official at the Controller of Capital
Issues who doggedly argued against Canbank’s proposal. Both approached
the controller DR Mehta, later chairman of SEBI, to arbitrate. They didn’t
have to. Mehta told them Ratnakar had already called and argued that in a
dispute between the FERA and CCI guidelines, the former was more
important. Apparently, Ratnakar was in a district 100 km from Bangalore
that morning. He not only found a quick solution but time to call Mehta and
convince him.
Another Ratnakar strategy was to get talked about, glorify the bank and its
achievers so that “others are motivated to identify with the achievers and set
themselves similar or higher goals and ideas. Once you achieve success,
recognition comes to you. Then you have a captive audience and you get
intoxicated because you are watched”, he used to say. He tried this little
management trick on Kannan.
In 1987, Ratnakar decided that though Kannan was an outstanding
performer, he had too low a profile. So, he nominated Kannan, along with
his boss, MV Kamath, for the best performance award in the merchant
banker category. After the awards had been given, during the bank’s annual
business plan conference, Ratnakar sent a chit to Kannan and a few other
executives asking them to speak on what motivated them to achieve what
they had. Kannan was thrust on to the centre-stage. He spoke for five
inspired and passionate minutes, bringing the hall down. At one stroke
Ratnakar had changed Kannan’s image.
Ratnakar could not have achieved such high profit by sticking to the fat
rulebook that blocked the growth of Indian banking. He showed scant
respect for regulation (which at times was maddeningly stupid), dancing
dangerously on the line dividing the legal and the ethical. Naturally, he
became the target of thinly disguised suspicion and contempt in RBI and the
finance ministry.
Ratnakar, on his part, was openly defiant of RBI. In April 1988, when RBI
banned Canara Bank’s portfolio management scheme, he merely shifted his
portfolio, of around Rs 700 crore, to Canfina, under the Corporate

Investment Advisory Services. It is this CIAS holding of Rs 4000 crore
which brought Canfina to the brink of liquidation after the scam. Canara
Bank even defaulted a few times on its statutory liquidity ratio and cash
reserve ratio requirements and had to be fined.
RBI and the ministry of finance retaliated by scuttling his proposals.
When CanMutual suggested that the mutual fund be managed under an asset
management company, RBI officials laughed off the idea saying, “Soon
you’ll ask for a separate subsidiary for lending and another for deposits.”
The same idea was accepted when SBI, almost a year later, woke up to the
need for Chinese walls between SBI Capital Markets and SBI Mutual Fund.
With his inherent pro-growth and pro-business stance, Ratnakar developed
a wide network of friends among the business community and found it
difficult to refuse a loan. Canara Bank was saddled with dud loans but his
ever-helping hand fetched for him gratitude from industrialists, fellow
bankers and friends, who at crucial stages in their career had been saved by
his “innovative” solutions.
Kapal Mehra, who controlled Orkay Silk Mills, was once strapped of cash
when Ratnakar rescued him overnight. The chairman of the Transport
Corporation of India, TC Gupta, told BusinessWorld in 1988 (which
incidentally coined the word “Superbanker”) that when he was hamstrung by
Syndicate Bank’s conservative policy, he had called on Ratnakar who asked
TCI to collect a draft from the bank the next morning. The TCI account
switched to Canara Bank. What drove Ratnakar to break rules and
accommodate his friends was his desire to “always find a solution.” One of
the best examples of this is his friendship with V Krishnamurthy, who was
later accused of having links with both Harshad and Fairgrowth.
In a closely regulated environment where bureaucratic rules circumscribed
enterprise and commercial judgement, Krishnamurthy, one of India’s bestknown technocrats and Ratnakar, one the most dynamic banker, made a
natural pair. “There were at least two occasions when Ratnakar helped me in
my career when my own abilities and reputation were at stake”, said
Krishnamurthy. “Ratnakar did things as a deputy general manager which
even chairmen of other banks had not been able to, and we became close
friends.”

Soon after Krishnamurthy took over as chairman of Bharat Heavy
Electricals Ltd. with the challenge of turning around the sick giant, the
company did not have money to pay even Rs 4 crore for staff salaries. Had
the cheques bounced, the staff would have been demoralised and militant.
Said Krishnamurthy: “I went to SBI, my main banker and asked for help.
They refused. I spoke to several other chairmen and they all said no. Then
somebody told me to approach Ratnakar who was then just a deputy general
manager. I asked him and his reaction was an immediate yes. Ratnakar
released the funds first and then wrote for permission.”
Later, Krishnamurthy was made the chairman and managing director of
Maruti Udyog Ltd., the sick public sector car company, which had become
an embarrassment to Indira Gandhi. Maruti had two banks on the premises,
“with whom it had run up huge outstandings and had lost their support”,
recalled Krishnamurthy. “I asked, now that we are reviving the company,
would they resume being our bankers? Not only did they refuse, but one of
them even went ahead and sued us to recover past dues.” Krishnamurthy
once again turned to Ratnakar. Canara Bank became a banker to Maruti.

“So when Ratnakar was starting Fairgrowth and he asked me to invest and
become a member of his board, obviously I was not going to refuse”, said
Krishnamurthy. Especially since Ratnakar was at a stage when he had to
prove himself in his independent career. Krishnamurthy wanted to do
whatever he could to help him make it. So did KL Rajgharia, one of the
biggest Maruti dealers and another beneficiary of Ratnakar’s largesse.
Ratnakar helped him get a Canara Bank loan which Rajgharia, however,
failed to repay on time.
Ratnakar’s success earned him as many enemies as friends. This is best
reflected in the mysterious CBI case against him for a Rs one crore house he
built in Bangalore. Ratnakar said he had spent Rs 400 per square foot to
build; CBI estimated the figure at Rs 750 per square foot. The Preliminary
Enquiry Report, prepared by KR Gangadharan, deputy superintendent of
police, CBI, Bangalore, listed 12 other assets acquired by Ratnakar through
the misuse of his position as chairman.
These included 500 square metres of land at NOIDA (Ghaziabad), flats at
Munish Towers and Manipal Towers, Bangalore, Azad Apartments, New

Delhi, a bungalow in Bangalore, two commercial properties in New Delhi,
property in Palam Vihar, Gurgaon, and one acre of agricultural land in
Mehrauli. This report was filed on 4 th December 1988, barely five months
after Ratnakar retired. CBI actually never filed a charge-sheet. But the case
hung over Ratnakar’s head like a Damocles’ sword.
Ratnakar turned to several people for help in the CBI case but each
attempt to suppress the case made CBI more determined to pursue it, recalls
Vijay Dhar. Once P Chidambaram, minister in charge of personnel, told the
CBI officials, “There is no merit in this case. I know the law better than
you.” The officials were back with a stronger case. This and constant
brushes with RBI left Ratnakar sadly isolated and with a conviction that he
was being sinned against.
This conviction took deeper root once he was out of Canara Bank in 1988,
when he was just fifty-two, after serving two terms as chairman. All through
1989 and the better part of 1990, he was looking forward to the plum
postings promised to him. “I would like to serve the government in a
capacity which can give me some sense of satisfaction. If that challenge does
not come my way I would like to do something of my own... I would like to
do something that would create an impact”, he said, just after retirement.
How prophetic those words were.
Ratnakar was rumoured to be considered for the positions of deputy
governor of RBI, the banking secretary and the chairman of to-be-merged
Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation and State Trading Corporation. He
was almost certain to get the latter job but with suspicious timing, a small
article appeared in The Indian Express about the pending CBI case against
him. Ratnakar’s goose was cooked. The irony is that a section of the family
that controls the Express Group later became large shareholders in
Fairgrowth.
In 1990, the VP Singh government came to power and Ratnakar, who had
stronger links with the Congress, gave up hopes for a position in the
government. SVS Raghavan, the former BHEL chairman, became the
chairman of the merged STC and MMTC. The only option left for Ratnakar
was to strike out on his own.

On 9 th July 1990, frustrated and bitter after waiting for a position in the
government which would give him “some sense of satisfaction”, Ratanakar
started Fairgrowth Financial Services with a capital of Rs one crore. Later,
he started five other companies under the Fairgrowth banner: Fairgrowth
Investments, Fairgrowth Home Finance, Fairgrowth Factors, Fairgrowth
Exim and Fairgrowth Agencies. Fairgrowth Financial, the flagship run by
managing director K Dharmapal, was expected to be the main source of
money to finance the other services.
Fairgrowth started making mind-boggling profits. But suddenly in early
February 1992, Ratnakar died. His protégé Dharmapal went berserk in the
great turbulence of the next two months, like Harshad Mehta, Hiten Dalal
and Stanchart. Whether fair or not, Fairgrowth was a case of too much
growth. It had run up huge outstandings with ABSFL and some of the
money was parked with broker Pallav Sheth. The secondary market was in
turmoil, with prices melting away. The Superbanker’s creation was recording
a meteoric fall.

Abhay Dharamsi Narottam or A D Narottam as he was known, was
convicted in the Canbank Mutual scam in 1999 along with Hiten Dalal.

Harshad Mehta on his release from jail. The Big Bull finally passed away
on the 31 st of December 2001, while he was still serving his sentence.

The Late J P Gandhi, he was the grand old man of twisted securities deals,
he worked with Bhupen Dalal for decades and was suspected to be Dalal's
ally in the “swindle” of Stanchart.

Jitu Shroff, was the man running the broking firm V B Desai. He is known
to be Harshad Mehta's mentor in the stock markets.

Ketan Parekh in his heyday, he is seen with Australian businessman Kerry
Packer, with whom he announced a joint venture that did not eventually
materialise.

Chapter 12
The Fairgrowth Story
It took just a few
months after
Ratnakar’s death for
his organisation to
collapse. The
boundless energy he
had released
consumed his own
creation. His
favoured protégés
engaged themselves
in a bitter power
struggle.

AS Fairgrowth hurtled into an abyss, it brought down one of the most
promising experiments of the Indian financial sector. B Ratnakar’s vision
was to establish a country-wide chain of financial supermarkets under the
Fairgrowth brand name – the same vision he had for Canara Bank when he
launched Canbank Financial Services and CanFin Homes. In Fairgrowth,
freed from bureaucratic interference, his vision could have become a reality.
As he told Business Today (in his last interview to the press) he wanted to
have a large office (around 15,000 square feet) in some major cities under
the name Fairgrowth. “This would be parcelled out into six or eight offices
for the Fairgrowth companies, each occupying about 2000-odd square feet.”
Plus, there would be a branch of Nedungadi Bank 9 ,over which Ratnakar
secured control in late 1991. His vision was to create a structure that would
let a consumer/investor use the bank branch to deposit or withdraw money,
invest in stocks through Fairgrowth Financial or Fairgrowth Investments,

take a home loan from Fairgrowth Home Finance and buy selected consumer
goods from the Fairgrowth Agencies – all under one roof.
Besides, with his reputed dynamism and innovativeness, Ratnakar was on
the verge of striking alliances with Ratan Tata (for the Tata companies and to
advise on the setting up of a commercial bank) and Aditya Birla for a joint
venture in South-East Asia. Also on the cards was a four-way venture
between Fairgrowth Factors, Vysya Bank, the International Finance
Corporation and DBS, a Singapore based company.
But from the start, Fairgrowth was based on compromises and adhocism.
Ratnakar picked up a few trusted lieutenants from various outfits of Canara
Bank and put them in charge of different businesses. K Dharmapal was
earlier general manager, running Canbank Mutual Fund, R Lakshminarayan,
executive director of Fairgrowth was an executive vice-president in Canfina,
A Karunakar Shetty, MD of Fairgrowth Home Finance, was the managing
director of Canfin Homes. And then there was KRN Shenoy, managing
director of Fairgrowth Investments, who was known to be guru of
“innovative” money market deals that sometimes put Syndicate Bank in
trouble. Conspicuously absent was R Kannan, who had left Canfina to join
Standard Chartered Bank at a fancy salary and later brokered Ratnakar’s
disguised takeover of Nedungadi Bank. “Kannan is still enamoured of
foreign banks”, Ratnakar would jokingly comment. “He will come around
soon.”
But Kannan would probably never have joined. He knew that Ratnakar’s
foot soldiers did not make for a winning team and that Ratnakar’s own
survival was doubtful judging by the way he was puni-shing himself with
more work even after a bypass surgery.
The only factor that kept the Fairgrowth team together was Ratnakar
himself. But even he could not inspire stability beyond a point as his staff
had differences between them. For instance,
R Lakshminarayan, based in Bangalore, did not see eye to eye with the
managing director, Dharmapal, based in Bombay. “The Bangalore office was
functioning independently right through”, said Dharmapal. “At least until
February (1992) they were in touch with the chairman and after he died they
continued to operate on their own. After all it was the registered office.”

There were other basic compromises. On paper, Fairgrowth Investments
was the one that was supposed to undertake stock market-related activities
like share broking, portfolio management, share shops, investors’ club,
equity research and underwriting. The company ended up being run by KRN
Shenoy, a money-market expert, and strangely not by Dharmapal who was
earlier running CanMutual and was ranked as a great equity trader.
Again, it was curious that Dharmapal was entrusted with Fairgrowth
Financial, which was supposed to offer services like leasing, hire purchase,
corporate advice, consultancy and managing public issues. These were
merchant banking activities, resembling Canfina’s range of services, in
which Dharmapal had little experience.
The boards of each of these companies were like courts where Ratnakar
was the king and a ragbag of characters including business-men, technocrats,
money managers, stockbrokers and political fixers were courtiers, the only
criteria for selection being their loyalty to Ratnakar. Fairgrowth Investments
and Fairgrowth Financial seemed like Ratanakar’s fan clubs. The directors of
Fairgrowth Financial were Ved Kapoor, owner of Hitkari Potteries and Vijay
Dhar, son of the late DP Dhar, a key minister in Indira Gandhi’s cabinet.
Kapoor, Ratnakar and Dhar had a joint venture called Prerna Motors in
Bangalore, which had the dealership of Telco trucks. Other board members
were
V Krishnamurthy, before he became a member of the Planning Commission,
KL Rajgharia, a big dealer in Maruti vehicles, Pratap Reddy of Apollo
Hospitals, TPG Nambiar, who controls the BPL Group and Vinod Doshi of
Premier Auto.
Krishnamurthy, having identified himself as a Rajiv Gandhi-loyalist was
in the wilderness during VP Singh’s regime. He was a man in search of a
role when Ratnakar offered him a position on the board. Naturally, he
accepted. Dhar had struck a friendship with Ratnakar when the latter was a
deputy general manager in Delhi, a friendship that grew over the years.
Dhar, who owns the Broadway Hotel in Srinagar and developed properties in
Delhi, was one of those originally involved with Fairgrowth, along with
Rajgharia and Krishnamurthy. Rajgharia was perhaps the closest to
Ratnakar. After he left Canara Bank, Ratnakar stayed with Rajgharia for

more than a year in his Lajpat Nagar house in New Delhi. That is also where
he suffered his first heart attack.
The board members at Fairgrowth Investments were a similar motley
crew. Chief among them was garment manufacturer, Pradip Paliwal, whose
wife Rashmi was a garment designer and a close friend of Sterra Sharma,
wife of Captain Satish Sharma. Paliwal owned a company called Palwell
Exports to whom the Bank of India and the Bank of Baroda had advanced
loans. Paliwal knew the system, how the banks worked, how the money
market worked and had more than an inkling about who was going to be
appointed chairman and of which bank. He was extremely close to Ratnakar,
sometimes helping him boost Canara Bank’s deposits. The other board
members were Congress MP Tirath Ram Amla (Vijay Dhar’s father-in-law),
stock-broker Rajendra Banthia and Ved Prakash who controlled an old
finance company called Motor General Finance.
The Fairgrowth boards looked like a hodge-podge but it mattered little
then because, thanks to Dharmapal’s trading skills, Fairgrowth Financial was
making good profits. In March 1991, after less than a year’s operation,
Fairgrowth had earned Rs 1.1 crore on a capital of Rs one crore, even though
Dharmapal had made several crucial errors of judgement. Ratnakar was once
again making waves. He was planning to go public but obviously several
powerful people were against it. The finance ministry sent out a directive
that no finance company with less than three full years of operation would
be allowed to issue shares. Fairgrowth was stopped in its tracks. In
September 1991, it issued further shares that took the capital to Rs 5 crore.
Among the allottees was P Chidambaram.
By early 1992, Fairgrowth was making enormous profits. At the end of
June 1992, when the company took stock, the figures were astoundingly
large for a two-year-old company. Fairgrowth traded in shares worth over Rs
7000 crore with core market borrowings (money markets and inter-corporate
deposits) of around Rs 500 crore. For March 1992, Fairgrowth had Rs 89
crore of income of which stock trading fetched Rs 66 crore, money market
trading Rs 21 crore and merchant banking and bill discounting Rs 2 crore.
Against this, the expenditure was just Rs 8 crore, leaving a staggering pretax profit of Rs 81 crore on which it planned to pay a tax of Rs 38 crore.
According to Dhar, the board had no inkling of what was going on. “Only

two directors understood finance: Nambiar and Rajgharia. In one of the
board meetings, Nambiar asked, “How can you make so much profit?”
Ratnakar was unconcerned. He was planning bigger things, in anticipation
of the financial sector being liberalised soon. In late January 1992, he was
talking to merchant banker Vijay Mehta and Harsh Vardhan, who headed
Vayudoot earlier, to start Fairgrowth Airlines. Unfortunately, a few days
later, on 2 nd February, Ratnakar’s brilliant career came to a dead stop when
he succumbed to a massive cardiac arrest. The main cause: unwillingness to
travel less and inability to lead a more disciplined life. It took just a few
months after his death for his organisation to collapse. The boundless energy
he had released consumed his own creation. His favoured protégés engaged
themselves in a bitter power struggle.
In all likelihood Ratnakar had an inkling this would happen. He had
drafted in Sid Khanna, son-in-law of Ved Kapoor and chief of Arthur
Andersen in India, to suggest a management structure for the group. He
formed Fairgrowth Holdings Ltd., a holding company of which key
Fairgrowth managing directors would have board memberships. Under the
plan, which Dharmapal knew of, Ratnakar himself planned to hold 30% and
the three MDs of Fairgrowth Financial (K Dharmapal), Fairgrowth
Investments (KRN Shenoy) and Fairgrowth Home Finance (AK Shetty)
would each have owned 20% and R Lakshminarayan, the executive director
of Fairgrowth Financial, another 10%.
That this structure was too fragile was apparent within a month after
Ratnakar’s death. The inevitable issue was, now that Ratnakar was no longer
there, who was the number one? Ratnakar’s elder son, running Fairgrowth
Agencies in Bangalore, was too young and not in the same league as
Dharmapal. Increasingly, his wife Prema Ratnakar’s name became
acceptable. But not everybody openly agreed. After Ratnakar’s funeral,
Kannan proposed the name of RS Pai, formerly with Canara Bank and then
chairman of Syndicate Bank, for the chairman’s position. But Dharmapal
had his own ideas. Two days after Ratnakar’s death he declared, “It is not a
legal requirement to have a chairman” Later, when RS Pai’s name was
brought up at the board meeting in Bangalore, Dharmapal, normally a calm
person, burst out in anger. He claimed that professionals like him were

behind Fairgrowth’s success and that he would oppose any move to install an
outsider. The board elected Prema Ratnakar as the chairman.
Was Dharmapal moving independently? One clue was in the shareholding pattern of Fairgrowth Financial. The capital of Rs one crore at the
start had become Rs 5 crore by September 1991 and Rs 8.6 crore by March
1992, two months after Ratnakar had died. Dhar later said that the board did
not know the details of this last increase in the shareholding.
Scores of new shareholders had subscribed to this capital increase.
Conspicuously absent were brokers like Ajay Kayan and Pallav Sheth who
were the original subscribers. The new entrants were a faction of the family
that controls the The Indian Express Group and
S Gurumurthy, a chartered accountant who once used to write investigative
stories against Reliance Industries for the The Indian Express .
Were they strengthening Dharmapal’s hands to eventually help him take
over Fairgrowth? No board member was as close to these new entrants as
Dharmapal was. He, however, denied any attempt to control Fairgrowth.
Even if Dharmapal was indeed attempting a slow takeover, few could
challenge him. Other directors recall that he had turned highly overconfident
by April 1992, as he cranked up mega profits in stock trading through Sheth
with whom he had parked
Rs 230 crore.
The Fairgrowth strategy was simple: borrow from anywhere and
everywhere and invest in the stock markets. It identified two main sources.
One was corporate money – small and big – including the proceeds of public
issues. Since late 1991, Dharmapal was scouting around for such corporate
clients in southern and western India. In fact, before the scam story broke,
Kayan, who was close to Ratnakar and was holding a large chunk of
Fairgrowth equity, felt that corporate money was fuelling the boom. But the
big source was surplus money from the public sector undertakings and
banks. There were two conduits: Syndicate Bank and the financial service
subsidiary of Andhra Bank, Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd., located in
Hyderabad. The choice of banks says a lot about Ratnakar’s and
Fairgrowth’s style of functioning.

Vijaya Bank, Citibank, Andhra Bank and more so, Syndicate Bank where
Fairgrowth Investment’s managing director Shenoy ran the investments
department, were the original gunslingers of the money markets. Syndicate
Bank broke the RBI regulations on buyback deals and fronted transactions
for brokers, giving them clean advances without any securities. In 1987, it
paid Rs 23 crore in penalty to RBI. It has also been involved in dubious
financing of Reliance Industries and then supporting the Reliance scrip.
Syndicate Bank’s connection with Fairgrowth ran deep.
Contrary to popular belief, Ratnakar did not really groom
ND Prabhu to succeed him. He was keen on getting RS Pai, an exCanbanker who later became chairman of Syndicate Bank. After the scam
was exposed, Pai was found to have 35,000 shares of Fairgrowth Financial.
Syndicate Bank, under him, served Fairgrowth’s purpose admirably. In
November 1991, when the market was booming and Fairgrowth, like
Harshad and other brokers, was looking for funds, Syndicate started
accepting money from PSUs under the portfolio management scheme. It
collected Rs 337 crore, of which it turned
Rs 90 crore over to Fairgrowth Investments. Evidently, the money was a
clean advance to the Fairgrowth Group. Even three months after the scam
surfaced, more than Rs 46 crore worth of shares were still in Fairgrowth
Financial’s name. Syndicate Bank had also routed about Rs 200 crore
through Kishore Narottamdas Amarchand where the ultimate beneficiaries
were two Fairgrowth companies. This amounted to clean credit from
Syndicate Bank.
ABFSL, like Fairgrowth, was in its infancy. In fact, the two grew up like
twins, though they could not, in some ways, be more different than each
other. One was a fully-owned subsidiary of a rule-bound government bank.
The other was a private sector outfit. Fairgrowth was born in August 1990.
RBI permission to set up ABFSL came on 6 th December 1990; it was
incorporated in February 1991 and started business on 1 st July 1991. The
Andhra Bank chairman was KR Nayak, earlier general manager of Canara
Bank under Ratnakar’s chairman-ship. ABFSL had the same wide range of
objectives as Canfina or Fairgrowth Financial: leasing, merchant banking,
hire purchase and, of course, purchase and sale of securities.

It turned out that neither Fairgrowth nor ABFSL were interested in these
services. ABFSL became a simple lender and Fairgrowth a borrower-cuminvestor. They had cut through a range of financial activities possible, to hit
upon the most profitable and logical business area. Just like Canfina,
Stanchart and Citibank, ABFSL was merrily circumventing RBI’s guidelines
on PMS while picking up thousands of crores. On the other hand,
Fairgrowth, just like Harshad, Hiten Dalal or Citibank, had found a source of
money with which to play in the market.
The strategy was that ABFSL would borrow from various PSUs and turn
the money over to Fairgrowth for a fixed return against ‘security receipts’ 10
.Fairgrowth in turn would pump the money into the booming stock markets.
Within a year, ABFSL also started borrowing furiously. By early June 1992,
when the scam exposure froze its operations, it had Rs 188 crore under the
head ‘investment service’ and over Rs 400 crore as ‘inter-corporate deposit’.
This was represented by Rs 493 crore of physical assets, Rs 96 crore of bank
receipts and the rest in bank balances at Hyderabad and Bombay.
Fairgrowth, which picked up Rs 1769 crore, was not the only one using
ABFSL money. Hiten Dalal received Rs 1156 crore, Stanchart got Rs 522
crore, broker VB Desai Rs 115 crore and National Housing Bank Rs 194
crore. All of them were using the money to play in the stock markets.
To be fair to Fairgrowth, it could not have diverted ABFSL’s money
without its knowledge. But after the scam surfaced, ABSFL showed outrage
at what had been going on, adopted a holier-than-thou attitude and claimed
that it had been cheated. “They knew that the money was going into market
operations”, said Dharmapal. “How else could we offer them returns of 2530%, sometimes even 40% depending on what the going rate for borrowing
was? The understanding was that Fairgrowth would issue security receipts or
‘trust receipts’ and wrongly declare that bonds or units had been purchased
on behalf of ABFSL. In fact, that money would be diverted into the market
and ABFSL was not supposed to ask for delivery as long as the interest
cheques kept coming in.”
When the scam story broke on 23 rd April, like every bank, ABFSL began
to hurriedly clean up its operations. It asked Fairgrowth to deliver all
securities mentioned on the SRs at the end of April. Obviously, these did not
exist. The money was in the form of shares and some of it was parked with

brokers. Fairgrowth could not immediately liquidate its holdings and buy the
units and bonds mentioned in the SRs as the stock exchange was closed due
to a brokers’ strike.
In late May 1992, as rumours about the fast-growing Fairgrowth being in
trouble began circulating in the market, Dharmapal, like everybody else
involved in the scam steadfastly denied them. In the third week of May, R
Lakshminarayan returned from Singapore. On 24 th May, he came to know
about the shortfall and the suspected forgery. On 28 th May, he told
Dharmapal about it. A helpless Dharmapal tried to suppress the information.
Even officials close to him were not told the truth. Officially, Fairgrowth
declared that it had only Rs 3-4 crore worth of outstandings.
Then the RBI governor called the Andhra Bank chairman,
KR Nayak, and Fairgrowth’s game was up. On 17 th June, SS Tarapore and
R Janakiraman ordered ABFSL to submit full details of their outstandings
with Fairgrowth. What ABFSL submitted, failed to satisfy RBI. The next
day was crucial. On 18 th June, Rs 100 crore fell due for payment to ABFSL.
Fairgrowth defaulted. On 20 th June, RBI once again asked for the
outstanding position and the realisable value of the assets ABFSL was
holding. What surfaced was Fairgrowth’s
Rs 240 crore liability towards ABFSL against which Fairgrowth had lodged
Rs 151 crore of units and Rs 70 crore of bonds at Bangalore and Rs 19 crore
of units and Rs 32 crore of bonds at Bombay. This looked fine on paper. But
that was all it was – a paper. Fairgrowth did not have the assets.
On 25 th June, exactly a week after the Rs 100 crore repayment fell due,
ABFSL told R Lakshminarayan that it would sell the securities lying with it
and square off its dues. Lakshminarayan requested them to hold on since the
market was depressed. Instead, Fairgrowth offered ABFSL, Rs 150 crore of
bonds and equity shares. It eventually delivered Rs 101.59 crore worth of
financial instruments. The next day, RBI officials descended on the ABFSL
offices in Bangalore and Bombay and took photocopies of the certificates.
Three days later, they went down to Fairgrowth’s Bangalore office and
seized the securities. They had been forged.

Apparently, somebody from the Bangalore office had crudely added a
couple zeros to increase the value of three UTI certificates. Of the other
securities, allotment letters of 9% HUDCO bonds (Rs 45 crore) and 9%
NTPC bonds (Rs 15 crore) were fake. The Rs 19 crore of units thought to be
lodged in Bombay were backed by a mere acknowledgment from UTI.
Fairgrowth was supposed to pick up the certificates from UTI and hand them
over to ABFSL. It took delivery of the certificates but did not turn them
over. In the end, ABFSL was left with fake allotment letters, tampered unit
certificates and Rs 42 crore of bonds quoted at 20% discount. Fairgrowth
was short by Rs 206.42 crore. As against this, ABFSL had shares and bonds
of Rs 101.59 crore leaving a net outstanding of about Rs 105 crore.
The managing director of ABFSL, Y Sundara Babu, flew down to
Bombay on 2 nd July, to collect more securities. But RBI was not pre-pared
to wait any longer. It lodged a formal complaint on the same day and
Fairgrowth’s assets were attached. The Fairgrowth board met hurriedly at
Bombay the next day where Sundara Babu was a special invitee.
The board gave an undertaking that it would provide sufficient shares,
receivables and leased assets to cover the gap. The resolution was minuted
and signed by Prema Ratnakar. Fairgrowth’s statement of assets and
liabilities as on 22 nd June was filed with RBI. It showed a surplus of Rs
33.54 crore. The Fairgrowth board met again on 5 th and 6 th July, in
Bangalore and submitted a letter to ABFSL earmarking securities worth Rs
84.87 crore and shares of Rs 10 crore and short-term loans of Rs 20.41 crore.
RBI ought to have objected to such earmarking but did not do so. However,
the governor turned down a request to bail out Fairgrowth.
The ABFSL board met for an emergency meeting at Madras and
authorised general manager, B Srinivasa Rao, to go to Bombay and move the
special court to get some of the Fairgrowth assets which, had been
earmarked for ABFSL, released. On 13 th July, Rao went to the Custodian,
AK Menon, appointed under the special court to recover the scam money.
He referred him to the well-known lawyer, Atul Setalwad. Setalwad in turn
advised Rao to seek Menon’s help in moving the special court. ABFSL
officials remained in touch with Menon who promised to make an
application to the special court based on ABFSL’s claim.

The claim was finalised on 25 th July, and thereafter, Rao and Sundara
Babu met Ashok Desai, advisor in the department of economic affairs at the
finance ministry. It was at this point that Menon suddenly changed his mind
and asked ABFSL to move the special court on its own. After prolonged
discussions with Menon, the attorney general, and Ajit Day, president of the
CSE, it was decided that securities with blank transfers held before the
Special Court Ordinance was promulgated, would be transferred to ABFSL.
This added up to Rs 135 crore. For third party assets lying with Fairgrowth,
which were earmarked after they had been attached, ABFSL would make an
application to the special court to transfer them in the name of Andhra Bank.
On 19 th July, ABFSL lodged a formal complaint with CBI and attempted
to release assets that it had held before and after the Special Courts
Ordinance. This was another instance where criminality over-rode
commercial considerations. According to Dharmapal, Fairgrowth had always
had a surplus of assets over its dues to ABFSL. Even in December, after the
BSE sensitive index had hurtled down to 2000, Fairgrowth’s surplus was
over Rs 5 crore. But the money was not with Fairgrowth. A large chunk of it
was lying with brokers like Pallav Sheth. When the scam surfaced, Sheth’s
dues to Fairgrowth amounted to Rs 105 crore. Between late April and June
1992, he had paid off some Rs 45 crore. In July, when ABFSL filed its
criminal complaint, Sheth’s dues to Fairgrowth were still Rs 60 crore out of
Fairgrowth’s total dues of a little over Rs 100 crore to ABFSL.
CBI had little interest in recovering the money. On 21 st August, it
arrested R Ganesh, an assistant vice-president, who had forged the unit
certificates and S Srinivasan, a vice-president. Later, in a case filed against
CBI, they complained that when they went to the CBI office at RT Nagar,
Bangalore, three officers led by a DSP called
DB Desai tortured Srinivasan. They kicked and boxed him to get a
confession implicating Dharmapal in the forgery. Srinivasan refused. They
then started beating him. The officers threatened to arrest him and lock him
up unless he signed the statement. Srinivasan did sign it but later retracted.
In another police complaint, Gopal Shankar Iyer, another arrested
Fairgrowth employee, claimed that he was tortured on 28 th August by the
same three officers, to sign a statement implicating Dharampal.

On 7 th September, CBI arrested Dharmapal and Lakshminarayan. Long
ago, Ratnakar had escaped the CBI net but his men were now caught. It was
their mentor’s energy, delegatory style of management and premium on
‘performance’ that had landed them in the scam.
Indeed, Fairgrowth was not the only Ratnakar creation that was tainted;
after all it was the child of Canfina and CanMutual, Ratnakar’s earlier
experiments. These two were scam-ravaged as well, for reasons very similar
to those that devastated Fairgrowth.
In 1994 Acharya Arun Dev, a controversial Calcutta-based real estate
developer, appeared on the scene as a rescuer. In a deal structured by
Dharmapal, he took over Ratnakar’s stake in Fairgrowth and ran the
company for a while with Nirmal Suchanti, owner of Concept
Communications – a financial advertising agency.
However, Arun Dev was mired in other problems and sold his stake to
Karsan Patel, a diamond trader. Fairgrowth paid off all its institutional debts,
entered into a settlement with the IT authorities and now has no outside
liabilities. It may become the first scam-affected entity to be de-notified.

Chapter 13
A Can of Worms
The story of Canfina
and CanMutual along
with that of
Fairgrowth
exemplifies the
financial audacity
that lies at the heart
of the scam.

LOOK at these people. In the public mind they were all suspects in the
scam: K Dharmapal, R Lakshminarayan and KRN Shenoy of Fairgrowth,
KR Nayak of Andhra Bank, RS Pai of Syndicate Bank, Ashok Kumar of
Canbank Financial Services, Anil Narichania of Canbank Mutual Fund.
They all had a common professional paren-tage. They were all B Ratnakar’s
men, having worked closely with him either at Canara Bank, Canfina or
CanMutual, the latter two among the most aggressive and reckless operators
in the money and stock market.
Harshad Mehta, Pallav Sheth and Ajay Kayan made money. Stanchart lost
it. But no money would have been lost or gained if Canfina and CanMutual
had not been making available hundreds of crores of rupees to the market
players. The cash came either from the public sector undertakings into
Canfina or from ordinary households and other banks into CanMutual. From
there, it travelled into the coffers of the parent bank and into the pockets of a
group of select, favoured brokers along a network of incestuous
relationships. In the process, they all flouted Western norms on arms’ length
relation-ships, insider trading, adequate disclosures and responsibility to
their fiduciary clients. The story of Canfina and CanMutual along with that

of Fairgrowth, exemplifies this financial audacity that created the scam of
this size.
When the scam surfaced, Canfina was found holding Rs 374.35 crore of
worthless bank receipts/subsidiary general ledgers issued by Bank of Karad,
covering three transactions done through Hiten Dalal. CanMutual too, was
stuck with bounced Bank of Karad BRs for
Rs 103.82 crore in two transactions done with Hiten Dalal. One was
Rs 58.39 crore of an 11.5% central loan of 2008. CanMutual replaced the
bounced Bank of Karad SGL with its own, sold it to Citibank, got it back
and resold it in September 1991 to Stanchart. The SGL bounced again and
Stanchart made a legal claim on CanMutual. Canfina’s and CanMutual’s
money had actually gone to Abhay Narottam’s account in the Bank of
Karad. The CanMutual official involved in all this was Anil Narichania,
assistant general manager. These sets of transactions are simply illustrative.
They don’t represent all that the Can twins were up to, ever since they were
set up.
First came Canfina, launched in June 1987. Ratnakar picked his youngest
and brightest people to manage it, giving them ideas and allowing them
freedom to operate on their own. One of his most successful protégés was R
Kannan, head of investment banking at Stanchart when the scam hit the
bank. Kannan had honed his skills at Canfina where he was a merchant
banker, starting with making public issues of companies. He was picked up
by Ratnakar from an obscure department in Canara Bank and posted to the
merchant bank. In 1987, when Canfina started operations, Kannan was a
scale III, middle management officer. He drove himself hard to perform in a
fast growing market to become senior vice-president within a year. In the
next three years, he became executive vice-president and then executive
director.
Canfina was Ratnakar’s answer to SBI Capital Markets, which it upstaged
by servicing clients with dedication and enterprise.
GA Shenai, then managing director of Canfina told this story to
BusinessWorld magazine in 1988. Canfina was handling the bond issue of
Nuclear Power Corporation. On the eve of finalising the NPC prospectus,
they realised that one more signature was needed. The prospectus was
scheduled to be filed the next day but the NPC chairman was in Delhi.

Canfina flew one of its officials to Delhi that night. He got the signature and
returned the next morning in time for filing the prospectus. This was unusual
and impressive for a public sector merchant bank.
The flip side of such enterprise was recklessness. SBI Capital Markets and
Canfina entered into a mad race to handle the maximum number of public
issues. The competition became an end in itself and Canfina supported
several promoters in making shady public issues. SBI Capital Markets used
the muscle and reach of its parent bank, forcing companies to hand it
merchant banking mandates. Canfina, on the other hand, identified
companies, which ought to have gone public and actively persuaded them
and advised them on projects and financing. Many of these issues, marketed
and promoted by these two, hit the market in 1984 and 1985, riding the crest
of an exhilarating bull run which brought hordes of small investors into the
capital markets for the first time. Scores of companies took advantage of this
to pick up the money and run. Some of these issues had even been appraised
and funded by the three development finance institutions.
As a lead manager, Canfina’s operations were visible to the public. Its
recklessness in bond trading was known only within the closed money
market. It was so aggressive that at one stage it managed to pick up thirteen
consecutive bond issues by PSUs, mainly to boost the deposits of Canara
Bank. This area was the preserve of MK Ashok Kumar, accused of criminal
negligence in leaving Canfina exposed to Rs 374 crore of BRs and SGLs of
the Bank of Karad.
According to one broker, often while other brokers and bank officials
were kept waiting outside the room of the finance director of a bond-issuing
PSU, Ashok Kumar would go in and walk away with the whole issue.
Canfina aggressively traded in them through a network of alliances with the
parent bank, public-sector companies and key brokers. In fact Canfina’s
unwitting purchase of 9% Indian Railway Finance Corporation bonds in July
and November 1991 was one of the most reckless acts that propelled markets
players into a commercial fraud. These bonds lost value since the interest
rates on bonds were liberalised in April 1991. Covering up such losses was
one of the key motivating factors behind the scam. But more about Canfina
later.

CanMutual had its own can of worms. It was being used as the private fief
of a small group of brokers and the parent bank. This was especially
scandalous because CanMutual claimed to be a high-performing fund,
subscribed to by “small investors”. The funds came from other banks and
brokers. In return, CanMutual agreed to run its funds according to the
dictates of its big “investors”. CanMutual’s fraud started from day one but
was exposed four years later thanks to the inspection by SEBI under GV
Ramakrishna. From the beginning, CanMutual operated in an unregulated
atmosphere, driven by Ratnakar’s boundless energy. This was apparent even
in the way CanMutual was formed.
At 6 p.m. on 28 th February 1987, Ratnakar sat glued to a television at the
Claridges Hotel in New Delhi, watching Rajiv Gandhi deliver the Budget
speech. Gandhi declared that Indian public sector banks would be allowed to
set up mutual funds. Ratnakar could barely wait for the speech to be over. He
grabbed some stationery and quickly drafted an application to set up a
mutual fund. This was typed out and delivered to the finance ministry the
next morning, putting Canara bank ahead of the queue of other hopefuls.
Canara Bank deserved it. Ratnakar had written to RBI way back in 1985
asking for permission to set up a mutual fund. But the bank’s desire to
innovate and experi-ment was constantly stymied by the rule-bound RBI
officials. Ultimately, CanMutual was established on 19 th December 1987,
with great enthusiasm.
Apart from being superbanker Ratnakar’s baby, it was the first mutual
fund outside the giant UTI. Ratnakar carved out a group from Canfina to set
it up, asking K Dharmapal to head the group. Simultaneously, SBI Capital
Markets prepared to set up SBI Mutual Fund. Both applied to RBI for
permission. As the schemes were being finalised, the tension in the banks
was palpable. Ratnakar not only wanted Canbank’s scheme to be the first but
also wanted to score over SBI in terms of the returns offered. Not
surprisingly, Canbank waited for SBI Magnum to announce its “assured”
return of 12% plus and then announced a 12.5% plus return.
Such were the competitive energies unleashed by Ratnakar that
CanMutual’s nexus with brokers and its eventually being dragged into the
scam of 1992 was almost inevitable. After all, the seed purchases of
CanMutual – done before the fund was formally launched – were made

through Harshad Mehta after a small puja at his Growmore office on Dalal
Street. This was the only link between Harshad and CanMutual whose
officials once used Growmore’s research base to make investment decisions.
CanMutual appeared to be a big hit with small investors. It was presented
as a professionally run and efficient outfit. Even after the scam, in a reply to
the Joint Parliamentary Committee’s questions, CanMutual loftily claimed:
“The fund aims at providing a vehicle to small savers and investors, an
access to the enormous growth potential of the capital market and to
maximise the returns on their investment.” This was a big hoax. When SEBI
took a close look at its operations in 1991, it unearthed an improper
collusion with brokers, inadequate record-keeping and a nexus between
Canfina, CanMutual and Canara Bank, each boosting the others’
performance by rolling around the same money.
CanMutual paid higher brokerage to Canfina for the Canstar scheme in
violation of the terms of the letter of offer. It indiscriminately transferred
money from one scheme to another, for which the board of trustees
apparently gave blanket permission though SEBI inspectors could not find
any evidence of it. The transfers helped the fund to bail out a scheme from
over-trading. This, of course, meant that the unit-holders of one scheme
benefited at the cost of others. Canshare announced excellent results and a
first-year bonus. The biggest benefi-ciary was Canara Bank itself since it
was the biggest subscriber to Canshare and Cangrowth.
CanMutual trumpeted the steroid-boosted performance of Canshare,
luring more and more small investors to subscribe to schemes. Along with
this, to ensure a thumping success of its new schemes, CanMutual diverted
money into them from the previous schemes. The game went on, despite
SEBI’s objections, till late 1991, when the regulator temporarily stopped the
Cantriple scheme.
CanMutual’s nexus with big investors including the parent bank and its
false claim that subscriptions had come in from small investors is not new. It
started with the inaugural scheme, Canshare. A broker who accompanied
Canbank officials on the promotion meetings in the south recalls that they
faced empty meeting rooms and came back discouraged. Canshare collected
merely Rs 4 crore from the public. Ratnakar was unwilling to admit failure,

so he began to canvass subscriptions. One of his industrialist friends from
Bangalore invested Rs 5 crore. Canara Bank itself made some investments
and the sub-scription figure was forced up to a respectable Rs 23 crore.
Canshare went on to become successful and created a demand for growth
units of mutual funds. Later, another scheme, Canstar, collected a record Rs
1000 crore by using similar means. Canara Bank was a big investor in each
of the schemes, using the mutual fund and Canfina for boosting its deposits.
Till 1990, CanMutual had no means to rationally decide what to buy and
sell. It did what the brokers said. CanMutual did not have a panel of brokers
nor did it set exposure limits. For its securities deals it did not even have deal
slips till April 1991. Somewhere down the line, the brokers simply took over
– literally. Ajay Kayan and Utsav Parekh, aver that Hiten Dalal used
Narichania’s room as his own. “Sometimes Hiten used to sit on Narichania’s
chair while Narichania would sit on the other side of the table as if he was
the outsider there”, says Parekh.
Hiten was the biggest dealer for Canfina and CanMutual put together but
there were others too, like Kayan, Parekh and Pallav Sheth. Some of these
brokers milked the fund dry at the expense of common investors who were
handed down dividends that barely kept pace with inflation. Mutual funds
like UTI and CanMutual were playing with thousands of crores in the highyield bond market and the cream-topped equity market. There, thanks to
insider trading and the natural advantages of being big aggressive investors,
they had the chance to double or treble their profits annually. Till the scam
surfaced, one of the big mysteries was where all the profits were going. The
money had obviously gone into the personal accounts of a few selected
brokers. So much for a government-owned mutual fund’s love for the small
investors. The biggest equities broker for CanMutual was SK Jhaveri, whose
public face was Pallav Sheth (18.38% of turnover). Kayan and Parekh did
16% through three different firms.
It is virtually the same story with Canfina. Scrutiny by Canara Bank and
the RBI-appointed auditor Shankar Aiyar & Co. found out that its back
office, where transactions are processed, was a complete mess. Brokers’
contract notes and cost memos were missing, forward contract notes for
11.5% 2010 central loans were not available in a few cases, Hiten Dalal, its

biggest broker, had not issued contract notes in many cases and counterparty
names were not disclosed in contract notes by brokers.
Canfina had no exposure limits for brokers and banks, had no system of
reporting outstanding forward contracts or ready forward contracts and no
systematic records of BRs. Brokers (Harshad and Hiten) often took positions
for themselves and then scouted for counterparties. Under SEBI’s orders,
Canfina was forced to suspend its merchant banking operations on 20 th July
1992.
Still, top Canbankers and Canfina executives showed an amazing loyalty
to Canfina. As it teetered on the brink of liquidation in the summer of 1992,
ND Prabhu, the former chairman, felt angry and helpless. Prabhu retired in
early 1992 and the new Canara Bank chief, J V Shetty, was alien to the
unique risk-taking culture of Canara Bank. “The bank always encouraged its
staff to take risks and anyone who did it was confident that the bank will
stand behind them”, said Prabhu. But it is precisely such institutionalised
and senseless risk-taking that destroyed Fairgrowth, CanMutual and Canfina.
For instance, Canfina, which had a Rs 10 crore capital, decided to
organise a safety net to the Reliance G-series debenture issue of
Rs 500 crore in 1987. The safety net, jointly provided by the Allahabad
Bank and VB Desai, was an arrangement to buy back the debentures if the
price fell below a certain range. Within a few days it was obvious that the GSeries and safety-net schemes were disasters. Investors began to queue up to
sell their shares, and Allahabad Bank, after watching the crowds for a day,
panicked and stopped the buyback. VB Desai’s offer folded up even faster.
Canara Bank, claimed that it continued the buyback, but it was scared
enough to restrict it to one centre at Mahim, a Bombay suburb. Even there,
things worked at a snail’s crawl and on the first day when the crowd became
unmanageable, the bank had to call in the police. It was the first and last
safety net offered by a large company. The concept, borrowed from the
British Petroleum disinvestment issue in the UK and proposed by the Vaghul
Committee on money markets, died an early death.
Prabhu later claimed that the concept was sound and that Canfina actually
made money on the deal. But what stands out is Canara Bank’s culture that

encouraged its subsidiary, with a capital of just Rs 10 crore, to take on a
huge risk which would have made it bankrupt, had it not tricked the
investors and run the scheme at only one branch in the Bombay suburb. RBI
came down heavily on the bank but Prabhu was unfazed.
Prabhu was shocked too, with the way Canfina had treated Ashok Kumar,
the biggest bond trader in the country. Ashok Kumar, lean, dark and as
defiant as a crusading outlaw, looked angry and hurt that the bank made no
efforts to defend him. But there was little JV Shetty, chairman of Canara
bank could do, though as former chairman of the Calcutta-based United
Bank of India he surely knew about the bank-broker nexus and suspect
deals. After all, C Mackertich, a big broker for Canara Bank, Canfina and
CanMutual, was also an important broker for the United Bank of India.
Shetty discovered that as on 31 st March, Canfina had Rs 3162 crore in its
portfolio management scheme. It broke all key RBI rules governing PMS.
The same person had control of own investments and clients’ investments.
Canfina did not disclose either its liability towards portfolio clients nor was
it reflected in its balance sheet. It had not even booked losses on its bond
portfolio. On the strength of such dubious financial statements, Canfina
declared a profit of Rs 100 crore and was planning a public issue at
premium.
Canfina was liberally used by the parent bank and CanMutual. It provided
the bulk of the subscription to CanMutual’s Candouble, Cantriple, Canstar
and Canpremium schemes. Canfina subscribed to the PSU bonds on the
condition that the PSUs made a deposit with Canara Bank. It had Rs 300
crore parked in fixed deposits and ran a huge current account with Canara
Bank. Despite such clear evidence of Canara bank’s lock on Canfina, the
bank gave evasive answers to the JPC’s query on its control. What crowns
Canfina’s fuzzy replies is the account of its romance with Bank of Karad
which started in 1988.
Did Canfina assess the financial standing of the Bank of Karad? asked the
JPC.
Answer: The assessment of the financial standing is not made by Canfina.

Did Canfina know the capital of the Bank of Karad at the time of the
commencement of business?
Answer: This aspect was not looked into by Canfina.
Canfina then followed up with an arrogant reply, which also looked
ignorant. It told JPC that securities transactions in money markets ran into
hundreds of crores of rupees and as such it does not have any relation with
the paid up capital of the counter-party bank. This is wholly untrue. It is the
Bank of Karad’s small equity compared to its huge liability to Stanchart,
Canfina and CanMutual that forced RBI to liquidate it, jeopardising
everybody’s claims.
For some strange reason, Canara Bank was showing remarkable
confidence to the outside world. Chairman JV Shetty told the press on 30 th
May 1992 in New Delhi, that the massive fraud was just “confusion”. This
innocuous confusion arose “because there are several banker’s receipts
which have to be reconciled involving a network of banks.” Shetty had been
appointed as the chairman just a few months before. He was not expected to
know much.
Shetty could only bring himself to admit that Canfina would lose some
money but that it was premature to assess the loss. According to a Business
Standard report of 30 th May 1992, “vehemently denying that Canfina was
involved in any misdeed, he said that it was merely acting under the
traditional convention of bankers’ trust for each other. The portfolio
management clients of Canfina are standing by it.” This statement sounded
hollow a few weeks later when it was clear that portfolio clients were putting
pressure to return their money. Canfina had sunk too deep for Shetty to play
the lifesaver.
On 20 th May 1992, Shetty, Canara Bank’s executive director
K Lakshminarayan, Canfina’s managing director AP Rao and executive
vice-president Ashok Kumar met Hiten Dalal, Abhay Narottam, Bhupen
Dalal, TB Ruia and others at The Chambers at Taj Mahal hotel to sort out
where the money had gone. As it happened in the case of Stanchart’s
discussions, the three-hour meeting merely led to a lot of finger-pointing.

Hiten Dalal and Abhay Narottam pointed out that JP Gandhi had taken the
bulk of the money. TB Ruia admitted to a liability of Rs 70 crore but
strangely, he would later go scot-free. This group met again a few days later
in the presence of CanMutual’s main brokers but Bhupen Dalal and others
stuck to their ground and Canfina and CanMutual were forced to file First
Information Reports on 20 th June. Following this, Ashok Kumar and Anil
Narichania were arrested.
Canfina, CanMutual, Harshad and Fairgrowth operated in a climate of
ignorance and lack of regulation. Once at an RBI meeting of bank chairmen,
ND Prabhu even asserted that “RBI has no control over my subsidiary,
Canfina.” SEBI’s power to control mutual funds came much later and even
then brokers were not being monitored closely enough. The experience
demonstrated the need for comprehensive legislation to regulate the financial
markets. Absence of such regulation turned even seasoned bankers and
dealers, reckless, arrogant and blinkered. The players themselves had to have
an internal system, which kept an eye on the sharp practices. Citibank and
other foreign banks, by not being victims of the scam, while following
general market practices, showed how.

Chapter 14
The Buccaneer Bankers
Citi’s basic strategy
was bend the rules
for a fast buck. If
charged deny it. If
caught say sorry and
try to do it again.

IN the beginning, everybody called it a stockscam. The stockbrokers
labeled it bankscam. And Harshad Mehta, who was illegally using bank
funds to invest in stocks, came up with his own original sticker: Citiscam.
“Citibank was the beehive of illegal activity”, he charged after being
released from jail in late September 1992. It would turn out that Citibank
was not alone in the crime. The practitioners of the fine art of indirect
malpractices were the buccaneering foreign banks. Citibank though was the
smartest.
Harshad had a running battle going with Citibank and its set of loyal
brokers. So the finger he points could be slightly crooked. But Harshad was
also among the biggest players and the best informed. Discounting his bias,
he could not have been totally off the mark. Either way, there is great irony
in Harshad’s accusations and Citibank’s denial. Harshad’s actions were
bigger and cruder versions of Citibank’s practices. Whether or not Harshad
accepted the similarity, he was the flip-side of Citibank. The difference was
in the degree of sophistication, scale and speed.
Citibank played in the money markets and stock markets; so did Harshad.
Both needed a big source of funds: Citibank had money from its portfolio
clients; Harshad used bank funds and money from public sector companies.
Citibank took positions and was offering two-way quotes; Harshad did this
too. Citibank and its brokers used institutions like UTI and other mutual

funds to support its positions; Harshad was on the same track. In short, he
was a broker who behaved like a trading bank. Like Citibank.
That was also where the big difference lay. Harshad did not want to
remain a broker forced to fund himself by devious means, whereas Citibank
always wanted to use brokers as a front. If the scam story had not broken,
Harshad would soon have institutionalised his business, making massive
public issues and investing the money through publicly-quoted companies.
Citibank was a dominant player in the securities business but used brokers
like VB Desai and C Mackertich as fronts. (It even bought over Desai’s
company, Havelock Leasing, and renamed it Citicorp Securities and
Investments Ltd.). Harshad refused to act as anybody’s front. Clearly,
Harshad and Citibank were moving in opposite directions while driving the
same money machine. When they collided, Harshad crashed while Citibank,
he felt, went scot-free with minor bruises. That explained Harshad’s outrage.
Citibank was as unique as Harshad, apart from the fact that it was an
institution with clearly articulated goals and a definite corporate philosophy
while Harshad was an untamed individual. Citibank was the biggest,
shrewdest and the most profitable bank and therefore towered over the
markets. It stood out after the scam as well, by insisting that it was squeaky
clean, smugly disdainful of the central bank, JPC and outraged fellow
market players. But as bits of information dribbled out about the bank and its
operations, it truly emerged as a four-letter word.
When the scam surfaced, the focus of attention had immediately turned to
Citibank. Such was its dominance in the money markets that everybody’s
first question was: “What is Citibank’s role in the scam?” Soon, this gave
way to bewilderment when the bank started portraying itself as Saint Citi.
The second question was: “How did it manage to escape?” There were no
answers, that is, apart from two articles in Business Today in June 1992,
which pointed out Citibank’s role as part of a cartel, hidden losses in its
portfolio management schemes and that Stanchart’s money had somehow
landed up with Citibank and the Bank of America. But there was little real
proof then of Citibank’s wrongdoing.
The evidence appeared in August – more than three months after the scam
surfaced – from official sources. The mildly-worded third report of the

Janakiraman Committee, appointed by RBI to probe the scam, was
ambiguous about a host of things. It was, however, categorical about
Citibank. At last, as long suspected, it was caught playing the money game
in its own buccaneering way – from a simple skirting of RBI regulations to
actually breaking them.
Citibank, the committee discovered, issued bank receipts even where it
could use the subsidiary general ledger facility, did not issue BRs on security
paper, issued BRs signed only by one signatory and had not maintained
proper records for verification of the signatures of the issuing banks’
officials. Apart from all this, for a bank that was proud of its systems and
procedures, Citibank’s own records were not clean – contract notes and
delivery orders for the bulk of the securities deals were conveniently
missing.
These were the doors leading to other serious, possibly criminal, actions.
For instance, on 18 th September 1991, Citibank was holding an SGL form
of CanMutual which had bounced on 27 th May 1991. Citibank, with full
knowledge that the SGLs issued by CanMutual had bounced, sold the same
to the Stanchart. Stanchart was still holding one of these bounced CanMutual
SGLs worth Rs 44.58 crore. It filed a criminal case against Citibank in New
York for this and two other transactions. This was settled out of court.
But Citibank’s suspect deals were all in its PMS, which probably ran on
the principle of “heads I win tails you lose”. If Citibank made a loss, the
PMS client bore it; if there was a profit, Citibank decided whether to give it
to the client, to keep it for itself or to give it to the broker. Citibank managed
to get money from public sector under-takings like Air India, UTI, Indian
Railways Finance Corporation, Vijaya Bank, and IDBI and private sector
companies like Aditya Birla’s Grasim Industries by offering them
guaranteed returns under PMS.
In sourcing the money, Citibank had violated RBI’s stipulation regarding
reserve requirements and while deploying it, milked client accounts. As was
done by a host of banks like Stanchart, Grindlays, Andhra Bank and others,
Citibank too exploited the PMS scheme to escape the SLR and CRR
requirements that apply to all deposits accepted by banks. Its technique was
simple. Though the clients’ books show such portfolio money as deposits

with the bank (and, therefore, attract the reserve requirements), Citibank
showed the transactions done out of the portfolio money as individual ready
forward transactions executed on behalf of the clients.
But violation of the reserve requirement was the least of Citibank’s
problems because other banks were doing it too and so the RBI found it
impossible to penalise Citibank alone. What put Citibank in a unique
dilemma was the basis on which it has deployed the cash. Depending on the
answer, it had a choice between getting caught for violating US laws or
returning the profits made out of client accounts.
The crucial question was whether Citi had promised fixed and guaranteed
returns to its clients. RBI regulations prohibited it from doing so. Citi had
cleverly used terms like “assured”, “indicative” and “benchmark returns”.
Other bankers and RBI inspectors did not see any difference. One foreign
banker said, “It is not as if anyone guarantees a return on a stamped paper. It
is all the same thing.” If Citibank had not assured fixed returns, then the
clients stood responsible for all the profits and losses made by Citibank. But
Jerry Rao, chief of Citibank could not come up with any instance of the bank
paying more than its benchmark return. Thanks to its treasury skills and a
booming equity market, it would have made more than the 14%-16% fixed
return it had promised. Instead, Rao insisted that “none of our clients will
lose the principal amount.” This too was false.
Citibank’s house broker, Ajay Kayan, pointed out himself that losses
suffered by Citibank in November 1991 were dumped on to their PMS
clients. Another broker admitted, on condition of anonymity, that the bank
has been retaining all profits made above the fixed returns. He claimed that
this was something the clients clearly knew and understood, i.e., the return
on portfolio would not be higher than that assured by the bank.
There were, in fact, two definite cases of the bank offering fixed returns.
In a statement made at the annual general meeting Telco in October 1992,
Ratan Tata, Chairman, declared that the company had parked Rs 85 crore
with Citibank under the PMS for a “guaranteed” return of one percent above
the return on the units of UTI. The second evidence was more incriminating
and was in the form of a letter written by Citibank’s Delhi-based assistant
vice president on 31 st January 1992, to the Power Finance Corporation,

assuring a fixed return of 14.25% on the Rs 150 crore they were planning to
invest. Caught red-handed, Citibank quickly dissociated itself from the letter,
blaming its own employee – a common practice among foreign companies.
Assuming Citibank was giving only fixed returns, what happened to the
money its traders made in excess of those returns? Those profits have either
been eaten up in Citibank’s own losses or have been passed on to affiliated
brokers. As an RBI inspection report of 1989 states:
The rates for purchases/sales of securities
by the Investment department on the
bank’s Investment Account from the
Customer Securities Unit (on behalf of
the fiduciary clients) are not (more)
favourable to the fiduciary clients than
the prevailing market rates on those dates
thereby implying that the bank is making
a profit from its fiduciary clients.
This clearly indicts Citibank for profiting from client accounts. It was a
common market practice to make such profits. SBI Capital Markets did it
and so did Syndicate Bank, Canfina and Grindlays. So why was Citibank not
taking shelter under “market practice”? Because milking client accounts was
a serious violation under the US laws and, therefore, more damaging to
Citibank than breaking guidelines of the central bank of a Third World
country.
The Janakiraman Committee has highlighted one specific case of milking
customers leading to massive windfalls for brokers. On 8 th April 1992,
Citibank sold Rs 26.50 crore of mutual fund units, GIC Rise II, to its two
favoured brokers, C Mackertich and Stewart & Co. Both the brokers sold
these units the very next day to another member of Citibank’s cartel,
Canfina, for Rs 40.50 crore, each of them making profits of Rs 14 crore on a
single day. On 11 th April, a similar transaction was made with the brokers
and Canfina, with GIC Rise I. This time the profits were even bigger – Rs
17.38 crore each for the two brokers. Finally, on 20 th April, Citibank sold
Rs 26.50 crore of GIC Rise II to C Mackertich, which the broker sold to

Canfina on the same day for Rs 50 crore, making a profit of Rs 23.50 crore.
In all, the two Calcutta brokers made a staggering profit of over Rs 89 crore
in just three transactions spread over twelve days.
Citi’s profit in 1991-92 was just over Rs 138 crore. Surely, it would not be
giving away Rs 89 crore for nothing. According to the committee, this was
“compensatory payment to the broker.” Compensating for what? Possibly for
taking off bond and equity losses from the bank’s books. This would have
been fine except that Citibank sold these GIC units from out of the portfolios
of its clients. In a stinging indictment, the committee noted “if any loss is
suffered by Citibank, it has been at the cost of the fiduciary clients, whose
best interests the bank was required to protect.”
Apart from baring Citibank’s nexus with these two brokers, this deal
violated US laws which required banks to keep the clients’ portfolio money
at arm’s length from the revenue stream of the banks’ own operations and
that of brokers. The discovery that Citibank was passing profits to favoured
brokers indicated that Citibank’s milking of client accounts could not be
detected in isolation. Its deals had to be read along with the two brokers’
books.
Citibank was one of the biggest traders of securities – more than Rs
215,000 crore or 17% of the market in 1991-92, says the committee. Much
of it was ready forward or buyback transaction, in violation of the RBI
stipulation which prohibited ready forwards in bonds and units. Citibank
claimed that since they were done on behalf of its clients there was no
violation. Actually, what Citibank was doing was common. Everybody else,
too, was doing ready forwards in bonds and units. It would have been so
convenient for Citibank to claim that. But it baffled everybody by continuing
to be obdurate and claiming that it had done no wrong. No other bank took
this strangely righteous stance on ready forwards.
One undisclosed PSU had placed money with Citibank between August
1990 and 1991 for periods ranging from two days to 182 days, at rates
ranging from 12% to 28%. The maximum amount outstanding at any point
was Rs 50.68 crore. Curiously, Citibank had contract notes of only Rs 50.42
crore of transactions. It, however, did another
Rs 450.20 crore worth of deals with PSU money for which it had no contract

note and delivery orders and no papers of custodial services as it was
required to provide. That apart, nine items of deposits showed in the PSU’s
books did not appear in Citibank’s books at all. It ignored the charge that it
was using PSU money to play in the market and keeping the profits to itself
– exactly what Harshad had done.
Clearly, the Janakiraman Committee’s findings sullied Citibank’s clean
image. Yet, with surprising arrogance, it continued to dismiss the
committee’s findings. India head, Jerry Rao alternated between anguish and
righteous indignation when discussing charges of wrongdoing. This was
curious because he surely knew that violations and misuse of the PMS were
nothing new. In 1989-90, an RBI inspection report pointed out that Citibank
was not following its own International Fiduciary Standards Manual
prescribed by its head office, which orders a clear-cut segregation between
the assets of the bank and that of its clients. The bank was caught offering
guaranteed returns and accepting funds for a period of less than one year.
Citibank did respond to these charges but RBI found it unsatis-factory. On
18 th January 1991, RBI finally wrote to the bank that “If the
irregularities/adverse features recur, we may be constrained to review the
position of the bank continuing to undertake such business.” In reply, a vicepresident of the bank, wrote to RBI on 2 nd February that “we will be
following the RBI guidelines...” The above sequence of events and RBI’s
wrath clearly establishes the nature of Citibank’s Indian practices. This gave
birth to one of the great mysteries of the scam: why did it continue to dig in
its heels when the charges were grave enough for it to at least suspend some
of its bank officials if not sack them?
Perhaps, with its profit-driven outlook, Citibank simply could not afford
to be shamed, despite proof of malpractices. That would have meant
abandoning its basic corporate strategy. According to brokers, treasury
officials and former deputy governor, Amitav Ghosh, Citibank has been the
high priest of high-risk high-profit strategy through creative interpretations
of the RBI guidelines. The bank itself supported dynamism that meant rulebending. “We have regulatory problems all around the world”, admitted AS
Thiyagarajan who was, till early December 1992, the area manager (India,
Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh) in charge of the treasury operations. When

the chairman of Citicorp, John Reed was in India in September 1992, he told
Thiyagarajan, “If you have done something wrong, please confess.”
But there was simply too much at stake for him to come clean. Citibank’s
level of treasury operations, its PMS deals and the bank’s nexus with certain
brokers were largely built up by Thiyagarajan. Two of his brothers ran a
Bangalore-based broking firm, Megastocks, whose biggest deals are with the
same C Mackertich and Stewart & Co. – Citibank’s house brokers.
Megastocks though, was not a broker for Citibank and according to one
spokesperson for the bank, Thiyagarajan had submitted himself to an
internal probe.
There was one small possibility of Citibank admitting to some of the
charges. Thiyagarajan and Rao were no friends. When the scam surfaced,
outsiders felt that Rao would use this opportunity to cut Thiyagarajan down
to size by making him admit to at least some of the lapses for which he was
responsible. Not only did this not happen, Rao even launched a strong
defence of the bank and Thiyagarajan in public. Eventually RBI asked
Thiyagarajan to leave the country. He has since been spotted in Singapore
and Indonesia. According to some market sources, he actively plays in
Indian stocks.
Citibank’s practices and Rao’s spirited defence owed to the bank’s internal
culture, which sets a high premium on winning. Besides, its head office in
New York may have made a strategic decision not to admit to another
regulatory problem, particularly in a Third World country. Or very simply, it
could be that Citibank got trapped in its self-image, of being a smart,
aggressive strategist in a dull financial world girdled by regulations. After
all, with vertically shooting profits (Rs 138.12 crore in 1991-92 as compared
to Rs 58.61 crore in the previous year), it was the envy of the entire banking
community.
That was the main difficulty in grappling with Citibank: the huge gulf
between what it would love to be seen as, and what it was. It would also like
to be viewed as loyal to India. When foreign banks came under a vicious
attack in late 1992, Rao appeared bewildered and troubled. He attempted to
lecture journalists on how committed Citibank was to India. “Is it a crime to
be successful in this country?” Rao asked repeatedly. “Maybe we were too

smug because our books were in order and we had made profits. I think
that’s where we went wrong”, he said, explaining the bad press that Citibank
seemed to get in the months after the scam investigation began. “We have
invested so much money in this country. We haven’t taken out dividends
from India for four years”, said Rao. “Our head office spends crore of
promotion money overseas. We have nurtured and developed the nonresident Indian investment in India. We have started a software export
company. We have brought the Digital Equipment Corporation to India.
Surely our success cannot be our albatross.”
This sounded impressive and JPC members certainly were impressed. But
all this was glib talk. Rao never said how much Citicorp remitted in other
forms if not as dividends; did not say that his great love for NRIs was
underwritten by the simple arithmetic of arbitrage: it could borrow low and
invest high, getting a straight spread of 5% or more, which was very
lucrative by any standards.
The problem with Rao was also that he probably never had a firm grip on
the bank’s dealings. In August 1992 he said, “Our customers have not lost
money.” In a press statement, Citibank said, “It is Citibank India’s policy to
mark-to-market the public sector bond portfolios. Therefore the portfolio has
no hidden losses.” Then in end-November 1992, the bank sent out letters to
some of its PSU clients saying that bonds held for them in the PMS were
being marked downwards to market price. This would involve a shocking
“loss of principal” to some of its clients and contradicted Rao’s assertion that
“none of our PMS clients have suffered any loss in principal.”
But more important, Rao conveniently ignored how Citibank undermined
India’s international credibility at the height of the balance of payments
crisis in 1990. When India was right under the hammer of US trade
representative Carla Hills, Rao, the master strategist, surprised everybody by
taking up India’s case and speaking against the US threat of trade sanctions.
Citibank was running full-page pro-India advertisements, proclaiming its 90year history in India. But its real face was exposed in 1990, when a severe
foreign exchange crisis hit India and the country needed a boost of
confidence. Citibank inserted a damaging condition in the letters of credit
that sought to isolate the obligation of honouring an LC to a particular
branch in Bombay.

When The Financial Express exposed this obnoxious condition some time
in November 1990, Citibank first publicly denied the story, then tried to
bully the correspondent and the newspaper, and finally came up with a lame
explanation. It told RBI that the clause was merely demarcating liability and
was inserted at the instance of the head office in New York. RBI did a snap
inspection and found Citibank’s claim false. RBI felt that the clause sent
negative signals about the country’s ability to honour its foreign exchange
commitments. On 17 th December 1990, RBI directed other banks not to
insert similar clauses in their LCs. On 22 nd December, Citibank was told
that even if its head office had instructed it to insert such a clause, it had to
seek RBI’s permission to do it. The Citibank official responsible for this,
Aditya Puri, was transferred. He is now the CEO of HDFC Bank. Later, Rao
would merely shrug and say, “That was badly handled.”
Apart from Citibank’s “patriotic” spirit, what was significant about this
episode was its gun-slinging ways when it came to dealing with regulation.
It never felt the need to check with RBI on grey issues. For instance, it was
satisfied with its own legal interpretation of RBI’s PMS guidelines. It had no
qualms in violating it. Citi was obviously familiar with RBI’s style of
supervision. For instance, RBI did not know of the LC clause and Citi would
have escaped if the media had not written about it. Citi’s basic strategy: bend
the rules for a fast buck, if charged deny it, if caught say sorry and do it
again.
In the BR reconciliation meeting called by RBI after the securities scam
had been exposed, it displayed a similar attitude. While Stanchart had
brought voluminous printouts and other banks were prepared to sort out the
mess, Citi’s treasury chief, Ramesh Kumar, told RBI officials: “We got your
letter too late. We are not prepared.” This angered ND Parameshwaran, chief
of the Department of Banking Operations and Development. “This is not the
way to behave. You should have come prepared. The formats were
prescribed several days ago”, he rebuked. When Stanchart officials pointed
out “We have outstanding dues from Citibank”, Citi officials said, “We
cannot say. We don’t know. We will have to check.”
Citibank would have run into major problems with RBI a long time ago if
only RBI had played and behaved like a central bank is expected to. In May

1990, it conducted a thorough inspection, which dredged up gross violations,
which in the US would have led to severe penalty and mass sacking.
Citibank had been deflating its reserve requirements, SLR and CRR, which
is viewed by all central banks as a very serious violation. In fact, what was
scandalous was that in spite of the previous inspection report having pointed
out the same violation, Citibank refused to change.
Citibank did securities deals at artificial rates and issued BRs against BRs
without having adequate physical stock and violated two critical PMS
conditions: it virtually guaranteed returns and used PMS money for less than
one year. It paid Reliance Petrochemicals, one of its fiduciary clients, Rs 6.3
crore without ever receiving delivery of securities and the transaction was
subsequently reversed. RBI said that this was probably done to bail the
company out of financial difficulty and contravened the one-year lock-in
period rule for the PMS. So did Citibank’s call money investments done out
of money received from UTI, IDBI and Vijaya Bank.
Citibank also allowed its clients to enjoy credit facilities well beyond the
sanctioned limits, through the bill-discounting route. It exceeded the credit
exposure to individual/group borrowers (worked out on the basis of foreign
funds deployed by them in Indian business) by wrongly computing the
amount of foreign funds deployed. It lent money against shares and
debentures to investment companies of Premier Automobiles and Raymond
Woollen Mills to help them acquire/retain controlling interest in violation of
RBI guidelines. Finally, in a cunning contravention of its obligation under
social banking, Citibank included ineligible “automobile loans” to selfemployed persons to show an impressive priority sector advance of 15.4% of
total advances. If such loans were excluded, the figure would slump to just
3.6%, which was far below the obligatory 10%.
The public sector companies were prohibited from putting money into the
PMS run by foreign banks. Citibank, as usual, found a way. It got Vijaya
Bank to raise money from the public sector companies and route it through
three different accounts. Vijaya Bank indicated yields of 11.25-13% to its
clients, while Citibank assured a uniform yield of 13% to Vijaya Bank. The
two banks struck a cosy deal under which they shared equally, any profits
made above the indicated rate of return. Since there was no agreement with

Vijaya Bank’s clients to pass on the profits, this clearly amounted to milking
customer accounts by both Vijaya Bank and Citi.
Despite such range and depth of violations, RBI deputy governor Amitav
Ghosh never met Rao formally to discuss the findings of the 1990 inspection
report, though there was some correspondence between the two. Citibank
officials argued that differences with the regulatory authority are “usual” and
that the bank was engaged in a dialogue. That was fine except that this
dialogue had been going on for two years. RBI’s inspection reports were sent
to the compliance department in Citibank’s New York headquarters, which
could not be bothered. Clearly, it was part of the bank’s official strategy to
take chances with regulation to boost profits.
Citibank’s division heads in India were reporting straight to their chiefs in
Singapore. So, the division heads were on par with each other, with Rao, the
head of the consumer bank, being the first among equals. According to
insiders, these chiefs differed on what strategy the bank should have for
India. Thiyagarajan felt that money management and financial services were
the greatest thing going, not consumer banking or corporate lending. Rao
violently disagreed with him and at one meeting yelled at him saying: “You
will bring ruin upon the bank.” Later, Rao’s own area, consumer banking,
created equal embarrassment for the bank as the treasury did.
Citibank’s big act in the money markets was not premeditated. The bank
was strong in corporate lending and had been positioning itself in India as a
retail bank, launching credit cards, automated teller machines, consumer
financing schemes and financing high net-worth individuals. This strategy,
marshalled by Rao, was consistent with its focus in the Asia/Pacific region.
But in India it was perhaps a few years ahead of its time. It invested heavily
in building a consumer franchise but in its zeal, ended up making a few
embarrassing slips.
For instance, after its smooth-talking salesmen did a lot of high pressure
indiscriminate selling of car loans to meet stiff targets, the bank was faced
with the threat of major defaults. In 1990, it had to appoint professional
debt-chasers. In some cases, it even had to use thugs to reclaim the cars. This
backfired badly in early 1992 when strongmen hired by Citibank stopped
former chairman of the Electronics Commission, Dr PS Deodhar, and tried

to snatch away his car, mistaking him for somebody else. Deodhar created a
shindig, causing major embarrassment for Citibank.
There were no such slips at the treasury division. In 1991, when the
money markets and stock markets were undergoing convulsions, a foreign
bank with superior skills had a great chance to make killing. Citibank was
well on its way to doing so when interest rates became turbulent. There were
two rate increases, one on 5 th October and another on 17 th March, that
lopped off 10-35% of the market values of government securities and PSU
bonds held by Citi on its own account and in the accounts of its clients’
portfolios. The losses would have been in hundreds of crores. This is where
Citi’s strategy of using brokers came of use.
It called its loyal brokers and asked them to take the bond losses by
buying them off at high rates. The brokers were then compensated through
profitable deals at the expense of Citibank’s clients. In early September, even
when Rao appeared cocksure that he was clean, he added a rider: “Our
Achilles’ heel is broker accounts. Broker-nexus is the penumbra.” That also
answers a nagging question: despite RBI inspection reports and the
Janakiraman Committee unearthing startling facts, did everything about
Citibank come out in the open? The answer lay buried in the books of
Citibank’s brokers.
Citi started the practice of making brokers work for it. It developed a set
of loyal brokers and got them to sell deals to the Indian banks. It
compensated them by giving higher brokerage and extending other facilities
including routing, parking broker positions and giving credits. “It had a
conscious strategy of promoting select brokers”, says Ashwin Mehta. “They
decided where the profits would go”. What helped was that money markets
had no electronic board, had no floor (so there was no ceiling on profits).
Brokers brought information on opportunities and helped generate mega
profits. All this was fine except that “as the oldest treasury operation in this
country”, says a former BankAm bond trader, “Citibank took it as its
birthright to get every profitable deal. The brokers were first supposed to
take it to Citi.” If they did not fall in line, they were blackballed.
One such broker had this to say: “To Thiyagarajan and Ramesh Kumar
and other smart kids who considered themselves high priests of money

markets, brokers had to be a kowtowing lot of monkeys who would peer at
them through the large glass partitions of the eighth floor of Sakhar Bhavan,
Citibank’s treasury office in Nariman Point in Bombay. Every once in a
while, one of these swollen Citibank heads would pop out and sermonise the
squirming brokers on what a broker is, what his limitations are and how he
should be loyal to the hand that feeds him.” The loyal ones were Hiten Dalal,
VB Desai and DS Purbhoodas of Bombay and C Mackertich and Stewart &
Co. of Calcutta. It was these brokers’ books, which carried Citibank’s
suspect deals.
Said a former chief of a British bank: “Citibank’s culture anywhere in the
world is to shake up the market by introducing competition and improving
services. But it is over-aggressive. If not controlled properly, it is like a
cancer, eating up the system itself”, In India, Citibank may not have eaten up
the system but left a pervasive influence. Its aggressive ways spawned
imitators across the banking sector. One of its strategies was to appoint close
relatives of powerful people in government services, a trick that all foreign
banks later followed. Of course, there was no evidence that it has used all
these connections but then there has been no systematic probe either.
It was a long and impressive list when the scam broke. Paresh Sukhtankar,
vice-president, is the son of DM Sukhtankar, secretary, department of
revenue, Maharashtra; Sandip Sen, assistant manager, is the son of SC Sen,
director of the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation; Sriram Chander,
manager, is the son of N Sriram, general manager of SBI Mutual; S Sridhar,
vice-president, is the son of
R Srinivasan, former chairman of Allahabad Bank and Bank of India;
Ramchandra Nayak, manager, is the son of PR Nayak, former deputy
governor of the RBI; Rahul Singh, assistant vice-president, is the son of
Duleep Singh, former chairman and managing director of Rashtriya
Chemicals and Fertilisers, etc.
BankAm was Citibank’s first cousin. It did all that Citi did but with a vital
difference. “BankAm had just two PMS clients”, said Vikram Talwar, chief
of the bank in India, a US green-card holder who thought that the scam was
not worth bothering about. His only problem with the scam was that his trip
to Johannesburg got cancelled after the scam was exposed. Talwar was
forced to leave his position as country head after RBI refused to clear his

application for a new contract that would have started on 1 st December ’92.
Talwar claimed that BankAm’s head office at San Francisco banned the
Indian unit from the PMS and so it had nothing to hide, unlike Citibank.
Nobody, however, banned BankAm from using brokers to fund its bond
losses. For instance, on 31 st October, it sold a 9% IRFC bond to Andhra
Bank for Rs 102.48 and bought it back for Rs 90, making a profit of Rs
12.48 crore on a single day. No wonder Talwar could proudly claim that
BankAm had adjusted its investments to the prevailing market price, taking
losses if necessary. BankAm, like Citibank, continued to insist that it had
done nothing wrong despite the fact that the Janakiraman Committee left
nobody in doubt about its gross violations. Among other things, BankAm
sanctioned working capital to Polyolefins, and 20 th Century Finance, to be
used by these companies for playing the stock market.
BankAm also sanctioned clean loans to Harshad without any
authorisations. It claimed these were “clerical errors”. In another set of
transactions, BankAm bought bonds for Rs 100 crore when the market price
was Rs 80 crore. Why would BankAm take a loss of Rs 20 crore? Because it
was compensated in another set of deals with the same broker. But BankAm
told the RBI inspectors that its loss was a result of a misunderstanding: it got
13% bonds instead of 17% ones! Such a crude attempt at lying by a worldrenowned bank stunned the banking community but served to goad a
lethargic and diffident RBI to take some action.
RBI should have acted long ago against these two US banks. “PMS
violations were taking place for a long time”, says Ghosh. “We had
conducted inspections in May 1990 and had warned Citibank about its
operations. I had spoken to Jerry Rao and Vikram Talwar and asked them to
behave. We felt that PMS is in direct conflict with the interest-rate directive.
After this inspection I issued detailed guidelines for PMS, including the
lock-in period and that each placement should be treated as a separate
transaction with a lock-in period.” That was in 1989. The banks flouted the
guidelines and the RBI did no follow-up.
As Citi and BankAm continued to dig in their heels against the
Janakiraman Committee’s findings, RBI gave the two banks a long rope.

They took more than two months to file their replies though they were far
quicker to issue press releases asserting that they had done nothing wrong.
Meanwhile, RBI had a new deputy governor, DR Mehta, who stepped into
Ghosh’s shoes a good ten months after Ghosh left. Mehta was keen on taking
decisive action against the foreign banks. Once the RBI had evidence that
Thiyagarajan was interfering with the scam investigation and working at
concealing facts, he asked Citibank to remove him.
In early December 1992, hot-shot Thiyagarajan was transferred out of the
country. After fifteen years at the bank, he was put in a function where he no
longer lorded over the market or made profit-boosting decisions. He was
posted to the global securities operations of the bank at its head office in
New York. From there, he quietly exited the bank and reappeared in the
Southeast Asia. Jerry Rao was transferred to London as the head of
consumer banking, from there to some technology functions in California
and was quietly eased out. He came back to India to launch a software
company MphasiS, merged that with BFL Software and now heads MphasiS
BFL. This was the way Americans handled their operations in the Third
World country: get around the rules to make super profits, if get caught,
protest loudly and then quietly transfer key employees and start afresh. This
is exactly how Enron acted ten years later.
Talwar, the green card-holding chief executive of BankAm was eased out
too. The bank was told that its application for a renewal of Talwar’s term,
which was expiring on 30 th November 1992, would not be cleared.
BankAm officials asked if Talwar could stay on as advisor. RBI refused. It
wanted Talwar out of the country. At last RBI was seen acting like a central
bank should, with all the powers that it had. Still, it was obvious that rather
than RBI governing the foreign banks, it is they who have governed RBI.
The long story of RBI bungling makes for a fascinating story.

Chapter 15
The One-eyed God
“RBI guidelines are
just that, guidelines.
Not the law of the
land.”

IN the old business district of Bombay they stand face to face: the twentyeight-storey building which houses the Bombay Stock Exchange and is the
heart of India’s capitalist system, and a kilometre away from it, the Reserve
Bank of India, the country’s central bank and supreme monetary authority.
This proximity is deceptive. BSE is a market, humming with brokers and
jobbers who are driven by a welter of information, trying to make a fast
buck. RBI is an ivory tower, full of self-important officials who are
information-averse and market-blind. The gulf between RBI and BSE is a
thousand times wider than the physical distance.
This mattered little, until 1990. RBI had direct jurisdiction over banks,
which were the biggest traders in government securities, public sector bonds
and units. This market was invisible unlike the bazaar in and around BSE.
BSE published the prices of traded scrips every day. RBI published buy/sell
quotes only of securities issued by the central government while for state
loans and PSU bonds there were no published quotes at all.
From the market-end, this gulf was bridged by Harshad Mehta who used
funds from the money markets to stock markets. From the regulators’ side,
the leap across this great divide was made by the RBI governor, S
Venkitaramanan when he asked investment institu-tions in early March 1992
whether the bull run at BSE was a good reason to book profits.

The governor’s move was radical by the central bank’s standards. Was he
trying to fashion a new expanded role for RBI? He argued “if speculation
sucks money away from the productive sectors, the central bank can surely
step in and enquire.” This was logical but was unconventional. RBI had
never before been bothered by such extraneous factors. The assumption was
that stock markets were inherently speculative and had little to do with the
banking system. There was only one officially recognised link between the
two: banks could provide loans against shares subject to high margins.
Harshad took advantage of this complacency and ignorance and utilised
bank funds for stock market operations. Neither RBI nor the banks were
aware of this. This was partly due to faulty supervision within banks. Plenty
of evidence surfaced after the scam to show that RBI’s inspection arm – the
Department of Banking Operations and Development – had been digging up
dirt on banks and brokers year after year, but the top brass simply failed to
understand the gravity of the findings.
The scam was the result of a whole set of market practices. Banks were
executing sales through false bank receipts without holding securities.
Brokers were using banks as fronts to fund themselves, and public sector
money was spewing into the banking system to be diverted through brokers
into the stock market. Each of these practices was in clear violation of the
RBI regulations. But what came as a stunner five months after the scam
surfaced, was the revelations that none of these practices were new. Though
the scale and intensity of the scam may have stunned even market players,
many of these practices dated back to 1979. It was the turbulence in the
financial markets in 1991-92 that had scaled up the practices and made the
players reckless.
Through all this, RBI acted like a one-eyed god; its other eye was often
closed and when opened occasionally, it merely winked.
Concrete and detailed knowledge about the bank-broker nexus, deals
struck at artificial rates, misuse of BRs, routing transactions, using PSUs’
money – in fact, all the factors that lay at the heart of the 1992 scam – dated
back to at least 1986 and earlier. On 20 th October 1986, Augustine Kurias,
an outstanding officer in DBOD, in a note to the chief officer, KK
Mukherjee, named two banks that had issued BRs without sufficient balance.

The banks: Allahabad Bank and Bank of Karad. They had purchased nonexistent securities and included them under their statutory liquidity ratio
obligation. Syndicate Bank and Andhra Bank were the sellers.
Central banks everywhere in the world impose penalties on banks that are
caught violating reserve requirements like the SLR. Syndicate Bank was
forced to pay Rs 23 crore in 1987 for falling short in its SLR cover. But then,
RBI itself was responsible for indirectly encouraging this fraudulent
practice. It mandated that securities held before 29 th March 1985, could be
valued at cost, market value or book value, at per the banks’ choice. In 1991,
the BR Act was changed and SLR was calculated at cost or face value of
securities, whichever was lower. This was a great incentive. Using a BR,
banks could buy a bond which was quoted at say, Rs 80 at artificially high
rates say, Rs 95 which became the higher cost price and gave it a bigger SLR
cover. Banks, Kurias discovered, were also circumventing the senseless
artificial call money ceiling of 10% through ready forward transactions in
units or other high-yield securities.
But the most glaring practice that Kurias and two inspectors, Sushil
Kumar and SS Kannarkar, unearthed in 1986, which was at the core of the
1992 scam was Andhra Bank’s nexus with VB Desai & Co., owned by Jitu
Shroff. Kurias wrote:
The deals of the brokers are being dealt as
if they are deals of the bank by issuing its
own BRs, issuing/receiving RBI cheques,
thus creating an impression in the market
that it is dealing on its own behalf...
Banks are doing name-lending and undue
favour to brokers... It is providing certain
facilities to brokers which are not made
available to any other customer... the
bank has issued BRs without having
adequate balance of that loan in the
brokers account.
Shroff would indicate Andhra Bank as the buyer/seller in a deal and get
the bank to pay/collect on his behalf. Had he undertaken this operation

independently, the cheques would have had to be routed through the clearing
system, resulting in a delay of a couple of days. He would have had to have a
float running into crores of rupees or an overdraft, both of which were
costly.
VBD was not alone. Andhra Bank did such deals for Bhupen Champaklal
Devidas and AD Narottam. These brokers enjoyed overdraft facilities from
the bank against which they would deposit securities and shares. The
deposits were often far in excess of loans, meaning that Andhra Bank was
actually offering safe custody facilities to the brokers for their assets. For
this and for name-lending, Andhra Bank charged a commission of 0.005%
which was too low to meet the cost of operations. Like the Standard
Chartered Bank and Canbank Financial Services, Andhra Bank did not
“have any register to watch the retirement of BR, there is no system to
obtain specimen signatures of officials of other banks authorised to issue
BRs and to verify the same”, revealed Kurias.
These practices were highly irregular and left massive scope for
manipulation – of course, a scam. Indeed, Andhra Bank was found to have
done some large transactions on oral instructions from VBD, some of which
were not entered into the registers due to “oversight’. But what was most
significant and a forerunner to the Bank of Karad and Metropolitan Cooperative Bank issuing dud BRs to Stanchart, was a similar practice
discovered by Kurias. Andhra Bank was issuing SGLs or BRs without
adequate security balance in VBD’s account. “This is a very serious
irregularity on the part of the bank. In one case the bank relied on the
correctness of records of the firm rather than its own”, said the RBI
inspectors. The bank’s defence was that since all the parties concerned had
executed their respective roles without any complaint, the transactions were
deemed to be in order. This seemed fine until the music suddenly stopped in
1992.
Andhra Bank had been putting through sales “again relying upon Shroff
that he would provide the particular security when demanded. In all
probability the purchasing bank (Bank of Karad or Allahabad Bank) must be
computing the security purchased by it for SLR purpose”, noted the RBI
inspectors, “which means that the bank has helped the broker in committing
a fraud in generating non-existent securities. This may lead to a chain of

transactions if the securities are sold by the purchasing bank by way of BR
issued against the original defective BR.”
Kurias’ other discovery was that banks were using brokers to dress up
balance sheets and artificially boost profits. For instance, Syndicate Bank
sold to Andhra Bank Rs 15 crore of bonds at Rs 97.75 on 31 st December
1985 and repurchased them on the same day at Rs 91.30 thus making a profit
of Rs 96.75 lakh on the date of the balance sheet. The deal was reversed on 6
th
January, and the bank suffered a loss. Andhra Bank’s (Fort branch) books
showed that it had acted on behalf of VBD. This, however, did not affect the
broker as his books closed during the Hindu Samvat year-end. Syndicate
Bank’s profit in 1984 was
Rs 5.07 crore and in 1985 Rs 5.98 crore. Without the Rs 97 lakh, the bank
would have shown a fall in profits.
Syndicate Bank used to get money from PSUs like the HUDCO, the Oil
Industry Development Board, the Rural Electricity Corporation and the
Army Group Insurance Fund to give yields at 11.5%. When it bought or
sold, it issued BRs in the name of these PSUs. The securities purchased
remained in the bank’s name and income earned on them, even if higher, was
not passed on to the clients. This system was a forerunner of the rampant
misuse of the portfolio management scheme. Indeed, Kurias perceptively
concluded: “the whole operation partakes the character of deposit acceptance
under the garb of investment portfolio management.” Like Andhra Bank,
Syndicate Bank too had poor records to back up what it was doing. “The
record seems to have been maintained... so as to confuse anybody except
those who create it.”
The fuel for these practices was RBI’s own directives. With admirable
clarity, Kurias noted that, some of these irregularities directly emanated from
the banks’ eagerness to improve their profitability in the over-regulated
environment in which they found themselves.” But at the same time, he sets
the perspective right by adding, “good intentions cannot justify any
violations of the existing laws/regulations. We may bear these trends in
minds in framing or amending the regulations in future... favours shown by
Andhra Bank or inflating profits by Syndicate are definitely fraudulent
practices. Central office may consider initiating suitable action.”

Despite an RBI inspector blowing the whistle so strongly, the top brass in
the central bank did not act. The normal course of action would have been to
suspend the brokers and treasury officials, penalise the banks severely, find
out how widespread these practices were and issue strong guidelines. RBI
did nothing, apart from issuing vague directives, which were completely
ignored.
On 18 th February 1987, the misuse of PMS came to light when The
Indian Express published a news item titled, “A mockery of RBI interest
policy”. It described how banks were accepting PMS money as deposit but
cleverly keeping it outside SLR and cash reserve ratio requirements. Such
deposits fetched guaranteed fixed returns for the PSUs, which were higher
than the interest rates set by the RBI. This was an old technique and used for
different purposes. But it set off a long debate within RBI.
On 31 st December 1984, Canara Bank was found to have been indulging
in a similar practice with HUDCO to which it sold and then bought back
securities against BRs. An RBI report of early 1987 states, “In other words,
the bank is borrowing funds from these institutions, under the garb of
portfolio management, at a rate of interest dictated by the lender of funds,
thus circumventing RBI directives on interest rate on deposits. Our
Bangalore Regional Office has recently been advised to instruct the bank to
stop such practices forthwith.” Not only did Canara Bank not stop it but
other banks soon followed its lead. Had RBI been clearer about its policy,
this would not have happened.
For instance, KK Mukherjee, who was on deputation to Ghana, wrote a
note on 21 st Feb 1987, in which he adopted a more liberal view. “It may
neither be desirable nor appropriate to put a blanket ban on dealings in govt
securities under buyback arrangements as this would impede the growth and
development in the market in gilts.” Mukherjee saw such transactions as
perfectly in order as long as the deals were done at market rates and no sales
were effected unless the same were actually held on the investment portfolio
either in actual form or SGL balance. Executive director, UK Sarma, had a
slightly different view as reflected in his 27 th February 1987 note:

The
buyback
arrangement
at
predetermined price is an ingenious way
of operating free interest rates on shortterm funds. The arrangement is a dubious
way of bypassing the RBI directives on
CRR/SLR and interest rates on deposits.
If sly and indirect flouting of the RBI
directives is to be curbed, as it should be,
we will have to advise such banks to give
up such arrangements. Alter-natively,
freeing of interest rates on short-term
deposits may have to be reconsidered so
that all banks can compete on equal
terms, without the inhibition of directive
violation.
This was followed by a meeting held on 24 th March 1987 between the
deputy governor (supervision) Amitav Ghosh, executive director Bagai,
Mukherjee, advisor-in-charge SS Tarapore and joint chief officer SJ Thaker.
Ghosh said that buyback deals in violation of interest rate directive had to be
curbed, adding that this was specifically discussed by him and another
deputy governor, C Rangarajan, with the governor RN Malhotra. Both Bagai
and Mukherjee argued for a pragmatic approach with the latter noting that
since the scope for raising additional resources and deploying them at
profitable rates was very restricted, buyback deals were one of the avenues
for improving the profitability of banks. The meeting ended with a
consensus that buyback deals should be allowed to continue, subject to
virtually the same conditions listed by Mukherjee in his 21 st February note.
Thereafter, in April 1987, RBI issued a circular that merely said “while
legitimate portfolio management could be undertaken, operations under the
cover of portfolio management which, in effect, violate the directives on
interest rates and reserve requirements would invite the consequences falling
on infringement of these directives.” This general warning was ignored. The
banks continued with PMS.
It was too tempting not to. PMS offered a double advantage: the money
was (illegally) free from the low-yield, statutory reserve requirements while

the income came from stock markets (share trading or financing margins).
This income was high at any point of time, since it was usually backed by
insider knowledge. Banks were freely accepting money for less than one
year and were guaranteeing fixed returns – above the normal interest rate on
one-year bank deposits. This was done with the full knowledge of RBI.
Throughout the period 1987-90, RBI repeatedly issued warnings. Market
players contemptuously turned a deaf ear.
On 11 th April 1988, Mukherjee warned the banks to stop buyback deals.
On 20 th December 1988, in a letter, Ghosh warned the banks that RBI had
come across instances of banks offering assurance of higher returns through
their portfolio management structure and ordered banks to strictly follow the
PMS guidelines. On 2 nd May 1989, the DBOD wrote that “in spite of our
cautioning the banks time and again... instances have come to our notice that
in some cases the fund entrusted was for a short period of 30 days and the
investment transactions were notional rather than real...”
This letter spelt out four crucial rules for future PMS deals: no guaranteed
return, funds to be accepted for a minimum of one year, transactions to be at
market rates, and proper accounting and documentation. Since investment
banks found these rules unrealistic, PMS continued with impunity and, in
fact, was stepped up as the turbulence of 1991-92 dramatically increased the
need for funds. The banks spotted a loophole and stepped up their PMS. The
loophole was in treating the PMS deposits as short-term cash used for
specific deals, with the risk wholly borne by clients. This new interpretation
of PMS was neither presented to nor approved by RBI. It was merely backed
by legal opinion picked up by some foreign banks. This is another example
of how poor was RBI’s grip on the system. Despite the circulars, the banks
never felt the need to consult RBI on such a sensitive issue, nor was RBI
tuned to what the market was up to.
Clearly, the extensive documentation by committed RBI officers on the
way banks and brokers exploited loopholes, was a waste. Their efforts were
undermined by successive executive directors, deputy governors and the
governor, whose job it was to understand the wider ramifications of market
practices. They didn’t, because they either did not have autonomy, or, from

their ivory tower, were out of touch with brokers who were actually driving
the markets.
Among the biggest factors behind the scam was RBI’s supreme disdain
for brokers as entities. One inspection report of 1991 even suggested that the
“abolition of brokers in the securities market, as was done in call money,
may help removal of middlemen who indulge in unhealthy practices. The
role of brokers could be played by RBI or the DFHI.” Even in 1992, few had
bothered to understand the way Harshad Mehta’s mind worked. He was a
broker who was competing with banks. All his actions – legal and illegal –
were actually variants of what banks had been doing. These ranged from
trading without securities, taking trading positions, procuring short-term
funds from companies and routing call money through his own accounts.
Harshad felt all this was legal. “I was not a bank. So I was not guided by
RBI rules. That was my advantage”, he said later. In fact, RBI was so
market-blind that Harshad was not even a recognised broker of the RBI! “I
applied for enrollment as an RBI-approved broker three years ago”, he said
in 1992. Though he did not get it, it did not stop banks from accepting his
contracts. Later RBI rules stopped being relevant altogether. Banks said that
any broker accepted by SBI would be acceptable to them.
Banks and brokers knew that RBI top officials were either ignorant or
could be influenced. RBI was then dominated by RN Malhotra who, as
governor, was more bothered by issues like priority-sector loans than
listening to the market signals, slack-cop Ghosh as the deputy governor and
the academic minded, articulate C Rangarajan, who later became the
governor. Ghosh had a completely free run over a large section of RBI,
including banking supervision. He retired in January 1992. If there was
anybody knew about the malpractices and could have stopped the scam it
was Ghosh.
When Ghosh’s sensitive and powerful position came under the spotlight in
1992, he first went on the defensive and later blamed the foreign banks for
having masterminded the scam. “The RBI was a little soft because we
wanted to develop an active bond market. I agree that the checks and
balances were not suitably in step with the liberalisation but RBI then
believed, when it is a new market let them free for sometime and then

regulate. Since there was no fraud or criminal conspiracy, we gave the banks
some leeway”, he said.
Ghosh wasn’t speaking the truth. Firstly, Kurias’s report specifically
mentioned that Andhra Bank had “helped the broker (VBD) in com-mitting
a fraud in generating non-existent securities.” Secondly, banks were using
PMS to make money at the expense of their clients, when all they were
supposed to get was a fee. Thirdly, PMS deposits bypassed reserve
requirements – a serious offence anywhere in the world. Fourthly, RBI failed
dismally to see that the bank-broker nexus, deals at off-market rates and
deals against non-existent securities were not isolated cases but constituted a
scam.
In fact, Ghosh himself admitted that RBI should have acted long ago
against the two US banks, the Bank of America and Citibank. “We inspected
Citibank in May 1990 and had warned them. I had spoken to Jerry Rao (of
Citibank) and Vikram Talwar (of BankAm) and asked them to behave. The
foreign banks are not very respectful to the RBI’s directives, because they
have a lot of influence in Delhi and are powerful internationally. I think the
problem is dual control over the banking system. That has to stop.”
Ghosh suggested “stern action should be taken against some foreign
banks, the licenses of at least one or two banks should be withdrawn… but
the situation should be explained in detail to their head offices and their
central banks before such action is taken. These banks are openly defiant
even of the RBI appointed committee’s findings. If any Indian banks had
dared to do so in their countries, they would have been asked to pack up and
leave.” All this bombast sounds very impressive but Ghosh was only playing
to the gallery. As he neared retirement in late 1991, he himself was keen on
joining one of the foreign banks as advisor. He told Venkitaramanan: “I want
to join the Local Advisory Board of ANZ if you clear it.” The governor
suggested him to drop the idea because it did not seem proper for the deputy
governor to join the very bank he was supervising, immediately on
retirement.

“PD Ojha is in BankAm and there is PK Kaul in ANZ. So what is wrong
in my joining?” asked Ghosh.

The governor called Bob Edgar, chief of Grindlays and asked: “Are you
proposing Ghosh’s name for a position in your advisory board?”
Edgar was surprised. “I am not considering it at all.”
Ghosh refused to give up. He came back to the governor and said,
“Vikram has agreed to make me a member of the advisory board.”
The governor asked Talwar: “Have you proposed Ghosh’s name?” Vikram
said he had.

“But I will not agree”, said the governor.
Ghosh charged Venkitaramanan with being unfair. The governor said, “I
have given you a position that gets you an RBI house in Napean Sea Road
and a car and good salary. Why do you want to join a foreign bank?”
Ghosh then went to the finance minister, Manmohan Singh, and the
secretary, department of economic affairs, Montek Singh Ahluwalia, and
complained about the governor. But nothing came of it. Three months after
he retired, Ghosh claimed that the cooling off period after retirement was
over. “Now I can join anywhere.” The governor said he should wait at least
two years. Soon after, the scam surfaced.
Under Ghosh and Malhotra, banks made a habit of violating RBI
guidelines. The 10% ceiling on call money was never observed, buyback
deals, which were prohibited, became the heart of the market; brokers were
banned from dealing in call money but they were ubiquitous; foreign banks
were prohibited from dealing with PSU money but they created a front and
dealt with the PSUs anyway.
Finally, as detailed before, all critical conditions of PMS were violated by
all. RBI framed certain rules and regularly carried out inspections, but it was
ultimately soft on the crooks and granted legitimacy to market practices like
not providing depreciation on investments; using the PMS to park losses;
entering switching deals at inflated prices; and year-end sales of securities to
brokers at high prices to be bought back later. Foreign banks were quick to

take the cue. As a Citibank executive told us in 1990, “RBI guidelines are
just that, guidelines. Not the law of the land.”
When Venkitaramanan became the governor in December 1990, the
scenario changed. Not because he was a zealous rule-enforcer but because,
for the first time in decades, an RBI governor was using market intelligence.
This owed to his very long and colourful career as a civil servant.
Venkitaramanan, the son of a poor school teacher, was a leftist activist in his
college days. So, despite topping the civil service examination, he was not
given a posting. He appealed to the then chief minister of Tamil Nadu who
in turn called up the Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Nehru ordered that
Venkitaramanan be immediately inducted into the cadre. Since then, he has
had a varied career, shaped by his close contacts with businessmen and
politicians. He has been particularly close to AC Muthiah, the Ambanis of
Reliance Industries, the Hindujas and Rajiv Gandhi, often taking decisions
that seemed to favour them. His chief instincts have been to keep his ear to
the ground and to act fast and decisively.
Tipped off by a market source, he initiated an investigation on 20 th March
1991, into the use of false BRs. Based on a quick scrutiny, the DBOD
produced a report on 25 th March. It showed nothing. Later it prepared a
detailed report in two parts. The first was completed on 31 st May 1991, and
was based on the inspection of twelve banks. This report was withdrawn by
DBOD officials and submitted along with another report on 16 th June 1991.
The first report detected serious irregularities only in the UCO bank. With
supreme ignorance the report stated: “It cannot be stated that the banks were
putting through transactions to provide business to brokers and that the
transactions were otherwise not warranted.”
The second report outlined serious malpractices but named no bank. This
led to the issue of the first-ever circular by RBI on treasury operations, on 26
th
July 1991. However, the malpractices escalated enormously, precisely
after the circular was issued, though Indian and foreign banks sent in routine
compliance reports right until the end of December 1991. One month later,
Ghosh retired. It was a critical time. Harshad was on a rampage in the stock
markets and money market players were bleeding, thanks to the coupon
hikes.

In 1986, it was still all right for RBI to continue to be blind. Caught in the
choppy seas of the 1991 transition, it looked puny and had simply no clue to
the extent of the bank-broker nexus, the loopholes in the Public Debt Office
and the misuse of PMS money. What started as an inter-bank market had
long lost that character. The market included the financial institutions,
mutual funds, PSUs, private companies, investment companies and, of
course, brokers. Multiple players and complex deals were compounded by
RBI’s self-imposed limitations: “We have access to only the banks. We
cannot inspect the brokers’ books”, said ND Parameshwaran, chief of the
DBOD. But the central bank of a country surely has the power to arm-twist
brokers to disclose the true nature of their deals. The DBOD would not even
consider this.
The result: though RBI inspectors were on the mark till 1989, the
turbulence of 1990-92 left them floundering. It was indeed revealing that
Harshad Mehta was not caught exploiting some small co-operative bank, but
the blue-chip SBI (97% of whose shares were held by RBI), and National
Housing Bank, another RBI subsidiary. He was playing with the central
bank’s money!
This complete breakdown of supervision led to the scam and tarnished
RBI’s reputation. But the scam was also an opportunity to change things. “I
am aware that RBI inspectors have to be as good as those they are
inspecting”, admitted Venkitaramanan who retired on 21 st December 1992.
RBI’s promotional policy has ensured that 90% of officers have aged their
way up from the lower ranks. “RBI needs to be proactive and respond much
faster”, he said.
Things hardly changed despite two scams and humungous bad loans in the
nationalised banks’ portfolio. There has been some reorganisation to create a
sharper focus on supervision but it has been merely cosmetic.

Chapter 16
The Witch-hunt
It was bad enough
that a gigantic scam
took place. It is as
incredible how hamhanded the scam
investigation has
been.

A few weeks after the scam story broke, CBI joined RBI
inspectors in the probe. Before these two agencies arrived on the scene, the
Income Tax department was already investigating Harshad Mehta. Three
months later, in August, came another investigating body: the JPC. Finally,
overseeing all these agencies were the eagle eyes of the Prime Minister’s
office. That seemed like an impressive line-up of detectives and you would
have hoped lots of disclosures, greater clarity and comprehensiveness. Sadly,
it became a case of too many proverbial cooks and nobody knowing the
recipe.
This was partly because each investigating agency had a very distinct aim.
CBI was interested in proving criminality. The Income Tax department was
looking for concealment of income. RBI was attempting to figure out what
had happened from the banks’ angle and the JPC was looking for some
deeper enlightenment. These aims could have been combined to produce a
complete view of the scam. Unfortunately, the investigative agencies were
petty enough to not want to co-operate with each other.
RBI appointed a probe committee whose members were
CP Ramaswami (Income Tax officer), YH Malegam (partner in the
accounting firm SB Billimoria), EN Renison (retired CBI officer),
VG Hegde (legal advisor) and Vimla Vishvanathan as the member-secretary.

The committee was headed by deputy governor,
R Janakiraman. This was a motley crew. It was not known what specific
roles each of the committee members played but there is little in the
Janakiraman Committee reports either from the tax angle or from the angle
of criminality despite the presence of Ramaswami and Renison.
Worse, none of these agencies was specifically entrusted to look at the
scam from a commercial point of view: finding out where the money had
gone and how much was commercially recoverable. CBI, for instance, could
not be bothered whether Harshad could pay back what he owed to the banks
or where the Standard Chartered Bank money had disappeared. Neither was
this a part of the JPC’s brief. RBI assumed that recovery was the
responsibility of the banks. The banks were in turn paralysed by the course
of the investigation.
Market players were put under tremendous pressure from these different
agencies. In the normal course the best defence for the accused would be to
point a finger at the market place: RBI knew what was happening but failed
to stop it. But in the highly confused atmosphere after the scam surfaced,
there was no scope for these arguments. Brokers were bullied into
submission, bank officers got pilloried, politicians, who control everybody’s
lives in India, got away scot-free, criminality got mixed up with violations of
rules while many key players in the scam simply escaped the net. All this is
best exemplified by the CBI investigation.
In May 1992, a few days after the government announced its decision to
hand over the scam investigation to CBI, RBI governor,
S Venkitaramanan, called Vijay Karan, director of CBI: “I hope you are
giving me a good officer.” Karan said, “I’ll give you the best. It is
Madhavan.”
K Madhavan, joint director in CBI, was seen as an upright officer who
had the opportunity or responsibility to work on some of the most
controversial cases, chiefly the Bofors scandal which has enthralled the
nation for over two decades. The moment it was announced that Madhavan
would handle the scam cases, the credibility of the government rose. The
truth would now be out. Or so everyone thought. Venkitaramanan even
suggested that Madhavan be made a member of the Janakiraman Committee.

However, not everybody was comfortable with getting Madhavan
involved. Cabinet secretary, Naresh Chandra, for one, objected to the idea on
two very valid grounds. The impression was: Madhavan talks (among others,
to the press) and he loves histrionics. Besides, there were rumours that the
Prime Minister himself was not too happy with the way Madhavan had
handled the Bofors case. In the end, Naresh Chandra’s objections probably
turned out to be partly justified. In its attempt to prove criminality, CBI, at
least initially, substituted charges for evidence, humiliation and harassment
for interrogation and conspiracy theories for investigation. The first month
of investigation and the very first FIR is testimony to that.
CBI’s cases of corruption are grafts, kickbacks, secret accounts, misuse of
power and forgery. The scam, in comparison, was extremely complex. CBI
never felt the need to understand that this was no ordinary case of fraud,
where a linear relationship could be easily established between an event and
individuals who could have profited from it. CBI had to deal with a tangled
skein of complex transactions woven by the warp of individual greed and the
weft of commercial convenience. Within that, the Harshad Mehta case was
the simplest. Harshad had taken money with a promise to deliver securities
but diverted it for his own use. Madhavan, perhaps driven by his love for
drama, overdid his pursuit of this simple case of fraud.
CBI went hammer and tongs at SBI, driven by a conspiracy theory. This
created enough of heat and dust but made CBI laughing stock among
knowledgeable bankers and brokers. Not that they dared to laugh; they were
too scared that CBI would strike at them next. In its FIR, CBI alleged that
the deputy managing director, CL Khemani, and two other SBI officials
fixed the time and price of transactions in a manner that defrauded SBI and
“caused wrongful gain to HSM (Harshad Mehta) group and wrongful loss to
SBI.” In support of this, CBI provided only one piece of evidence: during
1991-92, SBI had transactions worth Rs 41,252 crore out of which Rs
17,573 crore were with the HSM group. The rest, said CBI, were transacted
through fifteen brokers, yielding an average of Rs 1579 crore per broker as
against Rs 17,573 crore in Harshad’s case.
There are two charges here. First, that Khemani had fraudulently fixed
prices to enrich Harshad and second, that a favour was shown to Harshad as
reflected in the huge Rs 17,573 crore of deals with him as opposed to a small

average deal of Rs 1579 per broker. Take the second charge first. It shows
incontestable arithmetic skills of averaging but little else. In fact, the figure
of the average deal per broker, like all averages, hid more than it revealed.
Between April 1991 and March 1992, apart from Rs 17,000 crore of deals
with Harshad, SBI had done transactions worth Rs 10,000 crore with the
Delhi-based Naresh Aggarwala and Rs 5136 crore with DS Purbhoodas of
Bombay, con-trolled by Harshad’s arch-enemy, Hemendra Kothari. SBI’s
dealings with twelve other brokers were just a few hundred crores, making
nonsense of the exercise in averaging. CBI did not bother to question either
Aggarwala or Kothari on “wrongful gains”.
The second charge was more complicated because it involved “fixing
prices”. Actually, there were so many prices in the money market that it
looked as orderly as a 19 th century Indian bazaar. However, SBI had an
answer to the price-fixing charge. Investment decisions at SBI were taken by
a committee that included Khemani as well as managing director PV Subba
Rao. CBI had no definite details of how the timing and pricing of any deal,
sanctioned by the investment committee, was a loss for SBI and gain for
Harshad.
In fact, at the core of the Rs 17,000 crore transactions, was a
Rs 600 crore double ready forward deal which involved four move-ments of
buying and selling, making it Rs 2400 crore. This was rolled over several
fortnights. If rolled over five times, it leads to a volume of Rs 12,000 crore
from what is essentially just a Rs 600 crore transaction. Besides, in a double
ready forward deal, the two parties exchange securities. SBI stood to lose
nothing in a double ready forward. The volume had nothing to do with the
fraud. The real possibility of losses was in outright transactions, which SBI
did mainly through brokers such as DS Purbhoodas and Naresh Aggarwala.
SBI certainly stood to be defrauded if Harshad failed to deliver what he
promised or was unable to return the money. But who ought be blamed for
it? Khemani had headed a central office function where the investment
committee decided how to deploy the bank’s funds. The actual transactions
were done through the branches, which were operationally under R
Sitaraman and not Khemani. So, if the branch had falsified papers to cover
up for Harshad, did it automatically make the officers at the central office
conspiring criminals?

SBI’s systems were also to blame. The division of functions between the
central office and the branches made little sense if nobody is responsible for
either. As the head of investment operations, Khemani ought to have
installed appropriate systems, including periodic verification of stock and the
buck ought to have stopped at his desk. But that was a managerial issue, not
a criminal one. In the heat of May and June 1992, as CBI was let loose like a
bloodhound, Khemani seemed the right person to attack. A deputy managing
director of SBI behind bars? It created the desired stir that was typical of
Madhavan’s work.
During the interrogation, CBI asked Khemani: “You were in charge of the
investment division. How is it possible that you did not know that your
subordinates had this deal going with Harshad?”
Khemani replied that it was not his job to know. His job was to strike the
best deal for the bank. The actual transactions were supposed to be put
through by Sitaraman. “What can one do if he tells me that he has received
delivery of certain securities when he hasn’t?”
The CBI officer then came out with this gem: “If you wanted to exercise
control you could have gone to the branch and done it. Why didn’t you?” An
exasperated Khemani gave up. In the first few days in custody, Khemani, a
mild-mannered soft-spoken person was kicked and abused during
questioning and was made to sleep on a hard floor, causing him severe
abdominal pain.
Other SBI officials were similarly harassed. Subba Rao, the MD, had
joined the investment committee only four months before the scam. CBI
ransacked his house. His eighty-year-old mother-in-law was stunned at the
invasion. CBI ordered Subba Rao to go to the SBI office for further
investigations. The old lady who had been watching the arrests of Harshad
and senior SBI officials such as Khemani on television, thought Subba Rao
too would be jailed. She went to the door to see him off. A few minutes after
Subba Rao reached office, he got a call informing him that she had expired.
RL Kamat, the treasury officer responsible for bringing Sitaraman back
from south, went through a different ordeal. Kamat’s daughter, who was also
a bank employee, was engaged to be married. The family had made several

sets of jewellery, which were kept in a SBI locker. CBI sealed it. Despite
pleas and protests that a part of the gold was out of the daughter’s own
money, CBI refused to relent.
Not all cases of raid were as grim – some were downright funny. One such
was the raid on Jitu Shroff of VB Desai and Co. We will let the CBI
panchnama describe the raid and their haul in all its glory. Following are the
extracts from the panchnama prepared on 17 th June by RD Samant and CR
Kunetkar, both master key holders and head clerks at SBI main branch,
Bombay.

“We the above mentioned panchas were
present in safe deposit vault office of SBI
main branch when Shri PK Mankar, PI
CBI ACB Bombay came along with
Jitendra (Jitubhai) Shroff at about 11.40
hrs. He had come to break open the
locker No. 2967... A Godrej & Boyce
Mfg. Co. Ltd. man was called and
appeared before us today at 12.05 hours.
We all went inside the safe room and
locker No. 2907 was opened by the
Godrej servicemen with the help of tools
and drilling.” And then comes the climax.
“Only one rupee coin was found inside
the locker... The one rupee coin was given
to Mr Jitendra Shroff.”
Similar raids were conducted on 13 th June at Shroff’s vault in Bank of
India. There the haul was equally rich. “One old paper photo of God was
found.” Shroff seemed to be especially superstitious about one-rupee coins.
The safe deposit vault at Union Bank of India yielded a ten-gram silver idol
and a coin. A raid on the Syndicate Bank locker revealed a precious Rs 101.
In Delhi, CBI discovered that over and above the Rs 32 lakh “bribe” that
Harshad had paid to V Krishnamurthy, he was also given
Rs 40,000. Harshad’s Delhi books showed that. CBI triumphantly waved it

as another example of bribe. Unfortunately, for CBI, apart from the princely
sum involved, this new evidence referred to the wrong person. The money
had gone to a Growmore employee in Delhi whose name too was V
Krishnamurthy!
The charitable explanation for CBI’s bungling is that it lacked resources,
had to produce quick results and that its hands were tied. But what about
RBI, the watchdog for the banking sector and is, therefore, expected to have
expert knowledge? If RBI had been sleeping for ten years in the run-up to
the scam, then post-scam, it was groping in the dark. It acted in haste, was
partisan in its approach to banks, showed little understanding of the markets
and was unwilling to use unconventional means to get at the truth. The initial
reports of the Janakiraman Committee showed a similar attitude.
Just after the scam story broke, RBI called for a meeting of all banks to
reconcile their outstanding BRs. The meeting exposed the extent of fraud in
Stanchart, Bank of Karad and Metropolitan Co-operative Bank and
crystallised the scam for RBI. What it had was a mass of transactions done
by Harshad. It also had a set of people who were left with dud BRs, who
were identified as the victims and those who had issued the BRs were the
cheats.
RBI inspectors went from bank to bank picking on deals that looked
suspicious. The first of the six-part Janakiraman report barely scratched
surface. It listed SBI’s relationship with Harshad and certain dubious
transactions done by each of the banks. The second and the third reports
were also mountains of transactions that even money market brokers could
decipher only after repeated reading.
Among the most dubious contributions of the Janakiraman Committee
was its novel way of calculating trading volume. Every ready forward
transaction (buying/selling) was counted twice and a double ready forward
four times. The first report, which highlighted the nexus between Harshad
and SBI pointed out Rs 17,000 crore of transactions (buy and sell) between
the two. Except for Rs 215 crore of securities bought and an exact amount
sold, all transactions with Harshad were on a ready forward and double
ready forward basis. The committee’s arithmetic allowed it to tot up huge
volumes that Harshad built up with SBI by rolling over his deals. The

volume enhanced suspicion about Harshad’s nexus with SBI. But the
committee never bothered to find out whether SBI had made a profit or loss
in these transactions.
Ready forward deals are just sales/purchases done to buy and sell back at
specified prices. “If the transactions are genuine, there would be no loss to
SBI”, said a securities broker. In double ready forwards, the two parties first
exchange securities and later reverse the transactions to get back their
original securities. Here too, prices and time frames were fixed in advance
and there was virtually no risk of loss. “It is precisely in those massive
volumes of transactions with Harshad Mehta, that SBI made profits”, said an
SBI official. The normal spread in ready forward deals used to be between
1%-1.5%. Assuming that as the average rate, SBI had earned Rs 200 crore in
its Rs 17,000 crore deal with Harshad.
The committee also showed a great passion for numbers. The reports were
replete with tables and statistics, some of which drew gasps of horror at their
gross errors. The third report put out outstanding balances in the portfolio
accounts of various institutions as at 30 th June 1992. By that time, lot of
PMS deposits had been repaid. So RBI reported that bank subsidiaries had
just around Rs 458 crore as outstanding. Just two months earlier when PMS
was flourishing, Canfina had thousands of crores in its portfolio. The foreign
banks were collectively shown to have a portfolio of Rs 1386 crore, when in
fact, Citibank alone would have had had a portfolio of that size a few months
earlier. The report ranked the top three banks’ running portfolio accounts
(Citibank’s share: over 50%) based on the banks’ own submission, without
mentioning that several banks which large PMS portfolios had not submitted
their lists, making the rankings misleading. The error that caused the most
heartburn was brokers’ volumes.
The committee meticulously compiled a list of brokers who had more than
Rs 5000 crore of transactions in 1991-92. The name of DS Purbhoodas was
missing from the list. This stunned people familiar with money markets.
Kothari’s firm was an old well-established broker with a reasonably large
business. Besides, as Ajay Kayan’s associate in Bombay, it had closed
thousands of crores worth of deals. In fact, transactions with SBI alone
amounted to over Rs 5000 crore. So why did the firm not figure in the Rs
5000 crore club?

RBI officials explained that the firm’s name on its contracts had been
recorded with different spellings (DS Purbhoodas in one place and DS
Prabhudas in another and so on) and got fragmented in the computer-driven
compilation process. This was a callous explanation, which only showed
how RBI officials were completely out of touch with the market. If they had
even an elementary knowledge of the market players, the error would have
leapt out at them. When Kothari’s name did not figure in the Rs 5000 crore
plus list, all other brokers were deeply incensed at what they thought was a
partisan omission. One of them sarcastically remarked: “In a turbulent year
if DSP has not even managed to do Rs 5000 crore of transactions, he should
wind up his broking business.” The report also said that Citibank’s main
brokers for its Rs 215,000 crore of transactions in 1991-92 were Hiten Dalal,
C Mackertich and Stewart & Co. Strangely, Stewart & Co., did not figure in
the Rs 5000 crore list.
These bloomers occurred because the committee did not talk to the
brokers about volumes, deals and the nexus. It spoke only to the institutions.
This was consistent with RBI’s general approach of treating brokers at best
as a necessary evil. The DBOD chief,
ND Parameshwaran, was extremely diffident in even considering punitive
action against brokers. “We don’t regulate them”, he said, cutting off links to
the most vital reservoir of relevant information and market intelligence.
The scam forced DBOD to discover for the first time, decade-old practices
in the money market that it was supposedly overseeing. For a brief while, the
RBI top brass worked in tandem with CBI. There was widespread suspicion
that RBI governor S Venkitaramanan briefed CBI about CL Khemani’s
involvement in the scam and the possibility of Bhupen Dalal having a hand
in the disappearance of Stanchart’s money. The governor denied this. At the
same time RBI made no effort to protect the interests of SBI and other
banks. Indeed, the Janakiraman Committee’s misinterpretation of Harshad’s
trading volume with SBI quickly found its way into CBI’s first FIR.
RBI’s actions on other fronts were also confusing. In May 1992, the
governor had called his one and only press conference to deny a report in
The Times of India that the size of the scam was around
Rs 5000 crore, with little to back his denial. He also ruled out the possibility
of any bank going into liquidation. Within weeks, Bank of Karad and

Metropolitan Bank, which had issued dud BRs to Stanchart, were liquidated.
Bankers thought the action was premature. It served little purpose beyond
showing that RBI could act decisively.
Under Venkitaramanan, RBI was indeed aggressively decisive. It
demolished these two tiny banks, forced SBI and UCO Bank chairmen to go
on leave, appointed a probe committee, appointed special auditors to four
foreign banks and forced SBI and ANZ Grindlays to repay
Rs 1200-odd crore to the National Housing Bank. Was RBI playing to the
gallery or shifting the blame from itself’? Did its actions help recover the
lost money or boost the market’s confidence?
RBI’s arm-twisting of SBI and Grindlays to pay back NHB, the money
credited to Harshad’s account, was intriguing. As the second report of the
Janakiraman Committee proved, NHB was no innocent bystander. It had no
deal tickets for its transactions, no confirmation of deals, no record of BRs.
The Janakiraman Committee said: “There has been a total abdication of
responsibility by top management regarding fund management by NHB.”
The RBI was never asked to explain why NHB was the only one allowed to
secure its money among the various claimants to Harshad’s wealth.
RBI’s aggression vanished when it came to dealing with foreign banks
that had flouted PMS guidelines with impunity and bilked public-sector
companies. Only the amazing obduracy of Citibank and the Bank of
America and others pushed it into taking a tough line and asking that
treasury chief of all foreign banks involved in the scam be sacked.
If RBI’s reactions to the scam ranged from boldly decisive to hesitant, the
various arms of administration displayed a complete lack of co-ordination.
The finance ministry, which ought to have been the nodal co-ordinator along
with RBI, was not only caught unawares by the scam but down-played its
magnitude ever since. When the scam was debated in Parliament in its April
1992, none of the top bureaucrats in the finance ministry were around. The
first reaction of the finance minister Manmohan Singh was that matters
should be left to RBI to handle. He was even reluctant to make a categorical
statement in Parliament. Some members of the opposition and of his own
party seized upon this weakness and bayed for his blood.

Then the banking division of his ministry prepared an ordinance, under
which a special court was set up to try scam-related cases and a custodian
was appointed to acquire the assets of those accused and notified by the
court. This crucial ordinance was drawn up and issued without consultation
with the investment division, the market players, the stock exchanges, SEBI
or the institutional investors. The secretary, department of economic affairs,
Montek Singh Ahluwalia was in charge of both banking and investment
divisions. He was supposed to have considered all implications before
issuing the ordinance. Since he was flitting in and out of New Delhi, the
investment division (under which falls the stock exchanges) did not know
what the banking division was doing.
Once the ordinance was out, “tainted shares” (shares and assets belonging
to those notified under the act) became a major issue. Some time in the third
week of June 1992, UTI entered the scene. It turned the market topsy-turvy
for Rs 3 crore of shares, bearing the seal of Harshad Mehta and lying with
the SHCIL. UTI wrote to SHCIL not to accept the tainted shares, causing
panic among those who had legitimately bought shares from Harshad and
other notified brokers.
Since many scamsters had sold their shares in the market after 23 rd April,
thousands of innocent investors were caught holding tainted shares even
though they had paid good money and received delivery through the stock
exchange settlement mechanism. To clear these shares, investors were forced
to complete a long-drawn process of obtaining certification under a
procedure set out by the Courts. Some investors spent the next six to seven
years or more chasing affidavits in order to complete the certification
process.
Meanwhile, the Income Tax department also queered the pitch by
launching a spree of property attachments. Its officials took the stand that
even if the court accepted the transactions of notified persons as genuine, the
department’s own attachment order would stand. It slapped a Rs 10,000
crore tax order on Harshad and his wife. All this left the banks, victims and,
therefore, the real claimants to the assets, bewildered. Meanwhile, the
enforcement directorate was sniffing around to claw back funds that were
diverted overseas. As per law, their claims ranked higher than those of the
banks.

The finance ministry continued to act callously. On 16 th May 1992
Manmohan Singh met all bank chairmen. The scam, which had dented
public confidence, surely ought to have been at the top of his agenda.
Instead, the minister and the bank chairmen pretended that the scam was an
isolated case of fraud and it was back to business as usual. Singh said that
the scam was the “collective failure of the banking system and we must
accept responsibility for it.” Having made that token comment, he quickly
moved on to earth-shaking issues like computerisation and customer service.
Later, in the UK, the finance minister would declare that the scam had been
blown out of proportion. What he meant was never clear. But it certainly
showed callous disregard for the scandalous events in the marketplace and
for the Janakiraman Committee which had listed rampant rule-breaking and
how thousands of crores were sloshing around illegally with brokers when a
severe credit squeeze was on.
The most useful details came from the JPC hearings – but not due to the
efforts of the JPC members. Most of the members were completely
uninterested in understanding the markets or the financial system. They
rarely asked any probing questions, nor did they understand the
ramifications of many answers. Those who showed some interest and
knowledge – mainly members of the opposition – were also biased and
judgmental, pursuing their pet hates. But the JPC revelations were
significant because it caused such fear among government officials and
banks that they did not dare to lie. Brokers continued to fudge, but much less
than they would have.
Yet, out of the reams of information that emerged, nothing was truly
sensational or could be deemed a breakthrough. That was because there was
simply no strategy either at the collective or at the individual level to deal
with such a large and complex issue. The JPC started off by calling for
truckloads of general information and data which nobody read. Later, some
members appeared to be quite clued in about certain specific banks,
transactions or brokers but they remained completely silent and disinterested
about others. All this ensured that there was no systematic pursuit of truth.
If only the JPC members had first done their homework by talking to the
right brokers and bank treasury officials, they would have narrowed their
focus. In fact, the JPC got very close to the real can of worms, prised it

slightly open and left it at that. This was the PMS. Few JPC members
realised that it was the key to unlocking the intricacies of the bank-broker
nexus, political involvement and the huge illegal gains made by foreign
banks. JPC heard of the suspect transactions in September 1992 from public
sector officials. One such session revealed that the petroleum minister, B
Shankaranand had extended influence on the Oil Industries Development
Board to give PMS money to Canfina. The JPC missed the significance by
assuming they were just another set of irregularities. So, Citibank, the
kingpin of dubious PMS deals, certified itself lily white, took advantage of
the JPC members’ ignorance, lectured them forcefully and walked out
triumphantly.
Their ignorance led to some hilarious situations as thirty members with
different political inclinations, of whom just about five had some financial
understanding, went about their interrogation. One of them asked Harshad,
“Do you know any ministers?” The answer was “No”. Yet the next question,
read straight from a little piece of paper, was: “If so, when and where did
you meet them?”
Funnier still was the grilling of the Grindlays’ officials. One JPC member
picked up a sheaf of papers submitted by the bank and with a frown of
concentration declared: “I notice several entries here which say, GIFTS.” He
ran down the page, reading out all the entries and the amounts entered
against them. And then he glared at the bank officials. The Grindlays’
officials began to sweat, wondering what the member had detected. Then
they looked at the paper and relaxed. What the member was pointing out was
not gifts given out by the bank but an internal acronym for Grindlays’
Instantaneous Funds Transfer Services (GIFTS).
One broker was subjected to the same set questions from different
members. He wondered if this was a form of intense and clever probing.
Soon he realised that many of the members had been given the same
questions to ask. So irrespective of whatever explanations the broker offered,
the same questions popped up again and again.
Probably, the course of investigation was dictated by an invisible hand,
high up in the administration. Nothing exemplifies this better than the
continued detention of Harshad, who was treated like a circus animal,

dragged from court to court, from Bombay to Delhi and back. For over 100
days, Harshad was continuously interrogated, first by CBI, and then by the
enforcement directorate. This kept him in full public view as an undertrial
demonstrating that the government was acting. It almost seemed that the
investigative agencies, who otherwise kept information from each other,
were working in tandem to keep Harshad behind bars, under orders from the
top. In fact, CBI had been following a general strategy of imprisonment by
relay so that public attention was kept sufficiently riveted.
Harshad, his brother Ashwin and SBI officials were arrested on 5 th June
1992. On 22 nd June, everybody except Sitaraman and Harshad were
released. So by 23 rd June, the scam as pursued by CBI, would have lost its
sting. With unerring timing, super sleuth Madhavan pulled out another FIR
on 20 th June, relating to the Stanchart stream of the scam. The timing was
suspicious. Stanchart’s FIR was ready by the evening of 5 th June, when the
bank had its last meeting with Bhupen Dalal at the Taj Mahal hotel. Yet, the
FIR was filed two weeks later. On the 23 rd , CBI arrested Bhupen Dalal,
Hiten Dalal, Abhay Narottam, JP Gandhi and others to reinforce the
impression that CBI was at it, especially when the Parliament was in session.
On 17 th July, CBI gave an undertaking to Justice Sam Variava that it
would complete its investigation and would not seek further detention of
Harshad who was supposed to be a free man on 30 th July, his birthday. But
suddenly CBI pulled out an FIR dated 11 th June. It was the UCO Bank bill
discounting case, which had helped Harshad Mehta use Rs 50 crores. Up to
this point Madhavan was in charge. On 20 th July, Madhavan resigned,
provoking speculation that the government had asked him to slow down.
To counter that impression, CBI, headed by the acting chief
SK Datta, cobbled together another FIR which involved the Power Finance
Corporation. This was dredging up history. Harshad got PFC money in
1990-91 to play the markets and returned it later. The deal violated RBI and
ministry guidelines but nobody lost any money and nothing remained
outstanding. On 30 th July, the day Harshad was supposed to be released,
CBI went back on its word and put up a fresh remand application arguing
that another 16 banks were being investigated and Harshad would be

required in that connection. By this time, CBI had managed to file 11 FIRs
but only Harshad was behind bars. He was put back in custody until 13 th
August.
Harshad’s family thought that CBI had run out of cases against the Big
Bull. But by that time another arm of the State got into the act. On 30 th July,
the enforcement directorate told the court that it intended to arrest Harshad
whenever he was released on bail. So on 13 th August, 1992 when Harshad
was released by Justice Variava, the enforcement directorate arrested him in
connection with foreign exchange violation. Such tactics continued until the
fourth week of September when Harshad was finally released.
Harshad’s ally, Krishnamurthy, faced a similar pre-trial punishment. In
mid-July 1992, even after his links with Harshad and Fairgrowth became
open, Krishnamurthy insisted on staying put in his job. His main source of
political strength, deputy chairman of the Planning Commission, Pranab
Mukherjee, “absolved him from any involvement in the securities scam”, he
claimed. “I invested Rs 2 lakh in Fairgrowth Financial Services (FFSL) in
August 1990 when I was not holding any government office. I made the
investment out of retirement benefits received as the chairman and managing
director of the Steel Authority. I was one of the original directors of FFSL.
My shares begin with the 0 series. My association was not unusual because I
was considered a management expert.” Krishnamurthy was on the board of
Escorts Financial too and had resigned from there and Fairgrowth after
becoming member, Planning Commission.
The other charge against Krishnamurthy was that he had taken a cheque of
over Rs 32 lakh from Harshad. It was seen as a bribe because Harshad had
taken no collateral from him. But a bribe by cheque? Questions like these
were summarily brushed off. CBI was let loose on Krishnamurthy with
amazing viciousness. He and his son were dragged to the Tihar jail,
tarnishing the reputation of one of India’s best managers.
It could not have been that an honest government was attempting to book
a dishonest official. If Krishnamurthy was corrupt, there were hundreds of
corrupt politicians, bankers and public sector managers in this country. Why
Krishnamurthy? There were at least four theories. First, Madhavan had just

resigned and the government was suspected of scuttling the probe. It needed
something big with which to respond to the charge that it was tying
Madhavan’s hands. Krishnamurthy was an old foe of Madhavan. So, by
attacking him, the government could silence Madhavan’s sympathisers.
Second, Narasimha Rao had been systematically cutting down to size all
those who were close to Rajiv Gandhi. Krishnamurthy was one. Third,
Krishnamurthy was involved with Pranab Mukerjee in formulating the
economic policies of the Congress before the 1991 elections. Apparently,
they had differences with Narasimha Rao. The fourth theory was that a
senior bureaucrat, who later became the governor of a state, was settling a
personal score.
When Mukherjee became the deputy chairman of the Planning
Commission, Krishnamurthy was made a member in charge of infrastructure
though he was actually an industry expert. He was regularly absent from the
commission’s meetings. On the morning of 20 th July, somebody from the
PMO called up: “Put in your papers or we will put CBI on you.” The next
morning he came to the Planning Commission, got his resignation letter
typed and left for the Indian Institute of Technology for their annual
function. Mukherjee was away in Patna and expected back later that
evening. Krishnamurthy had resigned as per orders from the top. But still
CBI was let loose on him. The same CBI, however, showed little interest in
nabbing obvious suspects, especially those in the public sector companies
who were turning money over to finance brokers and foreign banks.
The trial by various other agencies followed a familiar pattern: passing
judgements even before the trial had started. It was almost a witch-hunt. The
CBI inflicted it physically; and some JPC members used their position to
settle private scores by demanding action against those who figured in their
private hate lists. This reached an absurd height when the RBI governor
himself was made the target. After having played a key role in initiating the
investigation into false BRs, stopping Harshad and exposing Fairgrowth, the
governor found himself being painted as the villain of the piece, months
before he faced the JPC. The finance minister was under pressure to sack
him. The minister, however, steadfastly backed him.
Eight months of witch-hunt left everybody bewildered and helpless. The
casualty was truth and justice. Despite the probe being multi-pronged,

several people who played a crucial role in the scam escaped the net.

Chapter 17
Who Won, Who Lost, Who Got Away
For fudging books,
laws anywhere in the
world attract
criminal
prosecutions. Nothing
happened to Citibank.
Or to many others.

FOLLOWING the witch-hunt of scores of people involved
in the scam, some lost face, their money and their market
position – like V Krishnamurthy, Harshad Mehta and Bhupen Dalal. The
lives of many junior officials were ruined. Others managed to escape. This
number is quite large and includes foreign banks, government officials,
ministers and bureaucrats. For months after the scam was exposed, fingers
remained pointed at brokers. Only the third report of the Janakiraman
Committee highlighted the role of institutions, especially the two US banks
(BankAm and Citi).
Although many businessmen, officials and ministers were deeply involved
in some aspect of the scam or other, the probe did not net any big fish other
than commerce minister P Chidambaram who was an unwitting scapegoat
and V Krishnamurthy, a politically expendable bureaucrat. The list of those
who got away includes industrialist TB Ruia and SN Chaturvedi and brokers
like Jitu Shroff. The officials and ministers remained anonymous. They were
the real big winners. Besides, all those who were involved in the core of the
scam – the portfolio management schemes – escaped for lack of conclusive
investigation. The biggest of these was Citibank.
One half of the scam was what fuelled it, or the supply side – surplus
money that Citibank, Stanchart, Canfina and others picked up from the big

PSUs by offering them portfolio management schemes. Kickbacks were
involved in PSUs parting with thousands of crores and in the loop were
ministers, chairmen and finance directors of these companies. This was also
where politicians came in and directed the money to their favoured brokers
and banks. However, the only politicians somewhat implicated in the scam
were B Shankaranand (under whom Oil Industries Development Board had
parked surplus money in PMS) and the minister of state for finance
Rameshwar Thakur. A host of other ministers and PSU officials and socalled “ethically conscious” foreign banks got away scot-free. They would
have been exposed if PSU officials were intensely grilled and their trail of
evidence followed through. It never happened.
In fact, even simplistic questioning by the JPC members generated enough
prima facie evidence of collusion between banks and officials of the
National Hydro-electric Power Corporation, Air India, Indian Railways
Finance Corporation, National Thermal Power Corporation and Power
Finance Corporation. But nobody was quite interested in probing the PMS
trail, which was the primary source of the scam. Was it simply lethargy or
because of the numerous relatives of top government officials and politicians
that are strategically employed by foreign banks.
Citibank
In 1993, four key executives from Citi’s treasury who had earlier been
transferred, ‘had to resign’. These included AS Thiyagarajan, Citibank’s
treasury mastermind whom the bank had ‘promoted’ and posted to the New
York office in November 1992. Why the resignations? Citibank, which had
until then refused to admit to any wrongdoing, refused to comment on why
Thiyagarajan had quit. Privately, however, senior Citibank officials were
looking for more “evidence” against him and his team. The bank had
changed its strategy, and was now trying to pin the blame on individuals. It
had also decided to close its notorious PMS schemes and asked many clients
to take back their money at a substantial loss. But there was no sign of the
bank suing Harshad as it had threatened to, when he called Citibank the
“beehive of illegal activity.”
Citi could have been easily hauled up by RBI, the Federal Reserve Board
and the Securities and Exchange Commission of the US. It showed one set

of transactions to its clients and another set to RBI and JPC, clearly proving
that it fudged its books, perhaps both the sets. Amazingly, for a foreign bank,
it also had deals with ‘dummy’ customers and ‘dummy’ counterparties and
also between these two mythical parties. It also had deals where there are no
counterparties! Some big deals with Stanchart exist in Citibank’s books but
not in Stanchart’s.
Citi entered into a number of ready forward deals which were recorded in
personal computers “operated by the traders and were not entered in the
main frame computer system...the back-up and operations departments
remained unaware of these contracts nor were the same subjected to audit”,
says the Janakiraman Committee report. As per the committee, “forward
commitments aggregating Rs 14,758 crores booked during 1990-91 and till
29 th June 1992 on the PC were not brought into the main frame computer
system. Information regarding these unsettled contracts and certain
particulars regarding the in-house transactions are not given to the fiduciary
clients, thereby impairing transparency”, noted the committee. In that case
not only Citibank’s clients but even JPC on which Citibank dumped reams of
information, was misled. For fudging books, laws anywhere in the world
specify criminal prosecutions. Nothing happened to Citibank.
Meanwhile, a team of officials from the US Federal Reserve Board
arrived to check Citi’s books. Surprisingly, they went away without talking
to anybody but RBI officials. Despite clear suspicions of insider trading and
bilking customer accounts, the SEC of the US also seems disinterested in
probing Citi or talking to the officials of its Indian counterpart, SEBI. In
February, Citibank sent another team of investi-gators. Nobody knows what
they found.
For years, people have asked where did the scam money go? It went
nowhere. It was right here, in PMS, used up in funding huge losses of some
key players. However, despite our writing about this in the media,
Janakiraman Committee did a hasty job, JPC did not understand it and the
special auditors appointed to probe foreign banks missed the commercial
cunning that laced hundreds of suspect PMS deals. Sensing that most
investigators were missing it, Citibank continued to assert, with the help of
an unctuous and hustling PR agent Roger Pereira, that it did nothing wrong.

However, that assertion was easily challengeable by late 1993 when with
the help of three leading securities brokers, we analysed Citibank’s PMS
transactions and came up with many interesting leads. These transactions
could have alerted RBI of corrupt practices by other banks and financial
institutions, the Income Tax authorities of possible tax violations and the US
regulatory agencies of violation of fiduciary responsibility. Besides,
evidence clearly pointed to a sophisticated ring of financial accommodation
Citibank was running.
We already know that scores of public sector units and several large wellknown private sector companies put money into PMS through smart foreign
banks and brokers. Power Finance Corporation turned over Rs 150 crore to
Citibank for a meagre return of 14.25% per annum. Among the most heavily
churned portfolios, PFC was made to transact vigorously with virtually all
Aditya Birla-BK Birla companies like Century Textiles, Grasim, Indian
Rayon, Indo-Gulf Fertilisers, Mangalore Refinery, etc. But two suspicious
transactions done on 25 May 1992, one month after the scam broke, stand
out.
On that day, Citibank bought on PFC’s account 9% IRFC bonds worth Rs
1.7 crore in face value from Vasavdatta Birla and
Rs 2.82 crore of the same bonds from Neerja Birla. This would have been
insignificant but for two facts. The deals were done at Rs 100 when
immediately before and after that date, Citibank had transacted millions of
9% IRFC and 9% HUDCO and 9% NPC bonds for its PMS client PFC in the
range of Rs 89-97. The second fact: Neerja Birla is the late Aditya Birla’s
daughter-in-law and Vasasvdatta Birla his daughter. Even assuming the
market rate to be Rs 90, around which Citibank did deals in the 9% IRFC
bonds, Citibank made PFC pay out Rs 45 lakh extra to the two Birlas. Was it
the bank’s way of conferring personal favours to the Birlas? The treasury
officials who did these dubious deals had conveniently gone during the scam
investigation.
PFC also figured in Citi’s deals with its favourite brokers
C Mackertich and Stewart & Co. As per the third Janakiraman Committee
report these two brokers made a huge Rs 89 crore profits in five deals in GIC
Rise I and II. Three of them were with Citibank’s client PFC. Surprisingly;
PFC never questioned Citibank about these gifts at its expense. Neither did

CBI. PFC, of course, was the same client that Citibank had promised a
guaranteed return to but later disowned it (in a letter by Raj Mittal one of its
junior employees).
GIC Mutual Fund’s Rs 25 crore accounts started in December 1991 when
the stock prices were already rising. Of all things, Citibank got the mandate
from GIC Mutual to buy equities. GIC Mutual itself was supposed to be an
expert in investing money in bonds and equities – at least that it is why it
was set up and allowed to raise money from the public. Why was it turning
over the money to Citibank? “Because the money market was down at that
time”, said SK Mitra, then chief executive of GIC Mutual. “Others like UTI
and BSE too had accounts with Citibank.” The problem with this
explanation is that portfolio schemes were supposed to be run for at least one
year. Clearly, the temporary downturn in money market could not be an
argument for GIC Mutual to invest Rs 25 crore for a whole year.
Citibank invested the GIC money mostly in equities like Chettinad
Cement, Indian Rayon and Reliance, between February and April – the last
stage of the equity boom. Mitra claimed that GIC got an overall return of
20%. The nexus of Mitra, C Mackertich and Citi would be repeated across
many situations. GIC Mutual jointly sold Citicards. In a highly unusual and
unprecedented move, the George Soros and Purnendu Chatterjee combine
acquired a chunk of government-owned GIC Asset Management when no
other nationalised mutual fund has such a foreign holding. Chatterjee’s key
link in the Indian market is Ajay Kayan of C Mackertich, Citi’s house
broker. Mitra now heads the finance function at the Aditya Birla group. It
was a nice little clique.
Of the 80-odd portfolio accounts that Citibank had, only a handful were
churned and abused. Over the years, Citibank had a roster of top clients – the
Birlas, for instance, in the private sector and the public sector companies –
whose money Citi was managing. If there was an issuer like PFC or GIC
whose instruments would not sell easily, Citibank placed the instruments in
the portfolio of its clients. In return, Citibank wanted the money to come
back to it to be managed. On December 13 th , 14 th and 17 th 1992 Citibank
placed GIC Rise II with its portfolio clients Grasim (Rs 50 crore) Bindal
Agro (Rs 25 crore) and Indian Telephone Industries (Rs 25 crore). About a
week later Rs 25 crore came back to Citibank as GIC Mutual became its

portfolio client. Citi then picked up the GIC Rise II units and sold it in
smaller chunks to other banks, brokers and financial institutions.
PFC needed money in early 1992. Citibank picked up its 17% bonds and
promised to place it with its clients. When the issue was subscribed, PFC put
the whole Rs 150 crore back into portfolio account with Citibank at a
guaranteed return of 14.25%. In 1991, UTI was strapped for cash when there
was massive repurchase of units. Citibank funded the repurchase. In return
for the bailout, Citibank got UTI to put money in its portfolio. Harshad
Mehta had a similar round-robin scheme going. He invested Rs 20 crore in
the Rs 49 crore raised through the Boinanza scheme with the understanding
that BoI Mutual will buy the Big Bull’s scrips.
Such circular incestuous relationships have meant losses for primary
shareholders – the government in case of PFC, unit holders in case of GIC
Mutual and shareholders in case of private sector companies. Grasim’s
shareholders have been less lucky than Neerja and Vasavadatta Birla. Grasim
had investments of over Rs 395 crore at the beginning of the year and over
Rs 330 crore as on 31 st March 1992 – an average investment of over Rs 360
crore throughout the year. On this Grasim has earned Rs 33.33 crore – a
return of just over 9%. This was scandalously low especially since Grasim
itself was paying an interest of 18% on the Rs 155 crore of debentures issued
in 1991-92.
Probably, somewhere down the line Citibank lost control on the
burgeoning PMS volumes and the criss-cross of relationships. It also needed
to hide its own and its brokers’ losses. So, it dumped huge amount of 13%
Coal India and DVC bonds into the portfolios of virtually all its clients.
These bonds were quoting at around Rs 75 and in any case were illiquid.
CIMMCO of SK Birla was being asked to take such bonds, which meant a
30% loss in principal. Builders Rahejas were even planning to sue Citibank
for breach of fiduciary duties. On 2 nd April 1992, Citibank sold shares of
four public sector companies to Varahgiri Investments (owned by the
Rahejas) even before these shares were quoted. After months of bluster,
Citibank decided that it was better to pay off the portfolio clients in full
rather than create more bad blood. It brought in $150 million for this,
indirectly admitting that it had recklessly traded on clients’ money. By then
it was probably sure that the SEC would not probe it.

The most glaring blotch in Citi’s books was hundreds of “dummy
customer” trades. Citi said that it was an accounting fiction created to match
a block sale made from more than one-client accounts. It first booked the
sale on dummy customer accounts and then squared it off against matching
transfers from clients’ accounts. If so, the dummy customer account should
always stay balanced. In fact, according to the records presented to the JPC,
at the end May 1992 the dummy account showed an excess sale of over Rs
10,000 crore.
Brokers who traded with Citibank offered us several explanations. First, it
was probably where some of the bond losses of Citi and its PMS clients were
parked. That is why the account showed an oversold position. Second, the
real names were probably substituted with “dummy customer”. The third
explanation is more mundane. Citibank may have simply lost track of the
voluminous transactions and slipped up in transferring sales from customer
accounts to extinguish the oversold position of dummy customer. In any
case, JPC and RBI never asked why a reputed foreign bank, claiming to have
great systems would have thousands of crores of transactions in dummy
customer accounts.
Of course, Citibank was not the only one whose accounts were
questionable. Bharat Petroleum had invested over Rs 100 crore in six lots
with Stanchart between February and March 1992. Other oil companies
deposited money in Citibank, ANZ and Stanchart. Canfina had received
portfolio funds from Nuclear Power Corporation
(Rs 294 crore) Housing and Urban Development Corporation
(Rs 240 crore) and PFC (Rs 226 crore), and other PSUs. Unfortunately, the
investigating authorities showed little zeal in pursuing these accounts.
There was a compelling tax angle too in Citibank’s operations that could
have been open to scrutiny. The bank had not calculated profits and losses
for each client separately. Neither did it have separate records of long-term
and short-term capital gains as they apply to individual clients. It pooled the
entire portfolio money entrusted to it and was, therefore, liable to deduct tax
on the profits made, before distributing them to clients. Citibank did not do
this and could have been hauled up by the tax authorities.

Equally scandalous was the behaviour of the various public sector
financial institutions. Whether they were supposed to lend money to
industrial ventures (IDBI), invest small investors’ money (UTI) or make a
decent money from capital markets (GIC Mutual Fund), these august
institutions all queued up to Citibank to entrust it with their money. IDBI
confessed to JPC that it invested about Rs 450 crore in PMS. It opened ten
accounts with Citi between 18 th September 1991 and 16 th April 1992 in a
period of acute capital shortage and especially when it had its own trading
desk. RBI did not ask why. Neither did JPC.
So, while the image of foreign banks appeared tattered, the two
buccaneering US banks escaped with minor bruises. Citibank got away for
two reasons. One, its PSU clients were uninterested in filing suits against it
for negligence in carrying out its fiduciary duty. Two, there was no
investigation into the books of brokers and banks together. In fact, bankers
are surprised that Citibank showed a large number of deals as direct when
the whole market knew that it always dealt through brokers.
Among the most astonishing cases of Citibank misusing PMS money was
the one where it overdrew from the account of an undisclosed PSU client as
much as Rs 237.74 crore. Citibank said that it had concurrent buy/sell
commitments against such overdraw. While the sell orders materialised,
Canfina (on anything concerning Citibank, the names of Hiten Dalal,
Canfina and the two Calcutta brokers crop up) failed to take up their
purchase commitments. Citibank had to honour its sales commitment,
leading to an overdraft. Citi perhaps got away by cooking up a story. Look at
one apparently unconnected evidence in the Janakiraman Committee report.
It involves the same Canfina and the same Rs 235 crore 11 .
The Citibank buy/sell deal mentioned in the case of overdrawn account
was actually due in June-August. If that is so, why should the client account
be overdrawn on May/June? Securities brokers suspect that Citibank may
have been holding outstanding BRs of May/June to be liquidated against
August buying by Canfina. When Canfina backed out, Citibank was left
holding the Rs 235 crore “overdraft”. If true, this also explains why Citibank
could claim in May, after the BR reconciliation that it had no outstanding
BRs and that its books were clean.

In 1993, when things started getting hot, Citi quietly started settling with
its clients, especially after a few well-known ones sent it legal notices. It
wrote off Rs 105.95 crore for the year ended 31 st March 1993. Eventually
the bank wrote off some $150 million.
Foreign banks like Citi made obscene profits by exploiting the Indian
loopholes, violating guidelines and influencing decision-making in Delhi
through powerful local advisory boards but escaped virtually untouched. In
money markets, they did 80% of transactions using sophisticated systems
and highly connected employees to exploit the weaknesses of ignorant, slow
Indian banks and PSUs. Sadly, the only Indian bank which could have kept
these four in check, SBI, also lost heavily and was dragged through the mud,
thanks to its fraudulent deals with Harshad. As RBI cracked down on them
in late 1992, the top four banks (Stanchart, Citi, ANZ and BankAm) began
the New Year with new chief executives. However, the easy exits of the
heads of foreign banks eliminated the important trails. CBI hardly called
Stanchart and Citibank’s top officials as witnesses. Amazingly, whatever
little criticism foreign banks had to endure was countered by a supportive,
semi-knowledgeable foreign press that blamed the Indian attitude to
foreigners 12 .
Stanchart
A few months after the scam broke, every market player insisted that
Stanchart’s losses and claims were grossly exaggerated. The JPC as well as
the Janakiraman Committee indicted the bank, but it still projected itself as
the injured party. Six years later, Justice Variava rose above the anti-broker
bias of other committees and came up with the startling truth: Stanchart
cannot prove three-fourth of its losses!
Stanchart’s foreign insurers too did not buy its claims. Under pressure
from re-insurers, a team from London made several trips to India to ferret
out information and identify witnesses. The case was to go into trial in
October 1998, but in September the parties opted for a settlement under the
Alternate Dispute Redressal mechanism. One condition of the deal is
complete secrecy; but surely the Reserve Bank of India had the right to ask
for the details.

Finally, Stanchart’s goose was cooked on 24 th December 1998 when in a
hard-hitting judgement, Justice SN Variava exposed its lies, exaggeration
and false claims. The judge reiterated what the JPC report and RBI had
already documented. That Stanchart’s treasury was run by stock broker
Hiten Dalal. For six years the bank had claimed that it was cheated by Hiten
Dalal of Rs 1233 crore until Justice Variava threw out its claims of nearly Rs
800 crore because it could not prove the losses.

“Truth”, as Justice Variava wrote, “has a habit of creeping out”, and the
relentless cross-examination of MP Rao forced it out. As the judge
identified, it was a Catch-22 for the bank. Either the bank’s top management
out of greed for higher profits, wilfully flouted the RBI rules and tossed out
prudent banking practices by entering into an arrangement with Hiten Dalal,
or, Stanchart was “the worst run and most negligent” bank, and this would
be “ground for closing down such a bank.”
In fact, the judge stalled the bank’s attempt to follow the standard
technique among foreign banks, that is, whenever caught breaking rules,
smoothly convert the issue into one of employee-fraud. A few junior
officials are sacked, some penalties are paid and it’s business as usual.
Justice Variava concluded that it is impossible to believe that dealers by
themselves had flouted limits and did anything without the blessings of top
management. Stanchart appealed against Justice Variava’s judgement and the
case may go on for several more years at tax-payers’ expense.
Looking back, what was most shocking was the injustice caused by
Stanchart’s false charges against Mount Banking Corporation of London, run
by owners of Indian origin. Bank of England closed it down when Stanchart
charged that a vast amount of money was siphoned out of India into that
bank. Eventually, since no wrongdoing and transfer of funds from the
country was proved, Stanchart came out with a public apology and Mount
Bank filed a defamation suit against Stanchart. On Stanchart’s allegations,
RBI had also hastily closed down Bank of Karad and Metropolitan Cooperative bank. Meanwhile, little has been found to nail Bhupen Dalal who,
in his methodical and meticulous manner, has now built up a whole library
of scam-related documents.

In fact, Stanchart and ANZ among others were caught crediting nonconvertible rupee cheques coming from Russian banks to Indian accounts
and transferring it abroad. Investigation agencies suspect that part of the
money has been used for funding terrorist activities. This was another scam
that seemed to have caught RBI unawares. That investigation went nowhere
after the trail led to a relative of a senior Vishwa Hindu Parishad office
bearer.
In the legal tussle between the National Housing Bank and ANZ
Grindlays Bank, the Supreme Court asked the latter to deposit the disputed
amount of Rs 912 crore along with interest at 18% per annum pending final
settlement. The total amount that ANZ Grindlays (since taken over by
Stanchart to form Standard Chartered Grindlays) was supposed to cough up,
would amount to Rs 1522 crore. The Supreme Court’s ruling essentially set
aside ANZ’s plea that the bank be relieved of its undertaking given to NHB
that it would pay 18% on the disputed amount.
ANZ had earlier given an undertaking that if Justice SN Variava were to
rule in favour of NHB, the former would pay 18% interest on the amount.
The dispute between the two parties began over a payment of Rs 506 crore
made by NHB to ANZ in March 1992 for the purchase of securities. The
amount, however, got diverted to the account of stock-broker Harshad
Mehta, the key figure in the securities scam. Though the cheque was drawn
by NHB in favour of ANZ, the latter had argued that it was normal market
practice to deposit such cheques in a broker’s account if he carried the same
and claimed to be the beneficiary of the amount. However, the plea was
disputed by NHB. ANZ subsequently paid back the amount in November
1992 subject to the understanding that an arbitration proceeding be held on
the issue.
The arbitration award, which was passed in April 1997, went against
NHB. The housing bank was told by the three-member panel of arbitrators
that it would have to return the amount to ANZ along with 18% interest
thereon amounting to a total of Rs 912 crore. Subsequently, on NHB going
on appeal to the Special Court, ANZ had agreed to pay the same 18% rate of
interest if the court ruled in favour of the former. In April 1998, the
pendulum swung in favour of NHB when the Special Court set aside the
arbitration award. ANZ later filed an appeal before the Supreme Court and

another application to relieve the bank of the undertaking to deposit the
interest amount.
The coupon-hike scam
Who else got away? The players in two sub-scams: insider-trading
relating to the two coupon-rate hikes of government securities and disinvestments of public-sector shares. The coupon-rate hike story was
intriguing but got much less attention than it deserved. It was linked to the
forces of change that turned the financial markets upside down in 1991-92. It
was a great year to gamble as the government itself created betting
opportunities by repeatedly emphasising that the banking system must move
to a market-driven interest-rate structure. This meant that the artificially low
coupon rates on government securities were to be hiked. These were credible
signals. Both Manmohan Singh and Narasimha Rao appeared personally
committed to a sharp turn away from a regime of subsidised interest rates.
Besides, the International Monetary Fund, to which India was queuing up,
insisted on freer interest rates, which meant higher rates.
If you guessed correctly that the interest rate was about to go up, or better
still, knew when it would happen, you could draw up a contract to sell the
securities before the hike. When the interest rate actually went up, the price
of securities dropped and you could buy them back at the lower price and
complete the delivery. There were two such increases in the coupon rate in
1991-92, in a space of six months. With surprising coincidence, a set of
banks and brokers dumped hundreds of crores of government loans before
each of the two coupon-rate hikes. Did they know exactly when it was
coming?
The first time, they sold Rs 550 crore of bonds to SBI on 20 th September
1991 for delivery on 5 th October, which was two days after the coupon-rate
increase came into force. Why did SBI buy? In a long note signed by the
deputy general manager, RL Karnal, SBI convin-cingly established its
innocence. The story starts in April 1991 when SBI’s coffers were
overflowing with oil import money, especially deposits from Indian Oil
Corporation.

On 20 th September, when the Rs 550 crore deals of SBI took place, it was
sitting on Rs 4307 crore of IOC money. Since this was a straight deposit, it
automatically created a statutory liquidity ratio liability for SBI, which it
wanted to meet by buying 180-day treasury bills. On 7 th August 1991, SBI
wrote to RBI requesting it to give it Rs 1000 crore of 11.5% central loans on
a ready forward basis. SBI received a reply more than a month later. On 27 th
September, well after SBI had done the kamikaze deals, RBI turned down its
request for the Rs 1000 crore ready forwards.
Meanwhile, SBI was not sitting pretty. It continued to submit bids for 182day treasury bills. But on 18 th September, RBI rejected bids made by all
banks and financial institutions. Along with that, out went Rs 500 crore of
SBI’s bids. This led the bank to scramble for other securities to meet its SLR
needs. Two days later, on 20 th September, SBI bought 11.5% 2010
securities of Rs 550 crore of face value at
Rs 100.83 for delivery on 5 th October 13 . By 3 rd October, when the coupon
hike came, the market value had fallen to Rs 97. In just two weeks the SBI
had lost almost Rs 22 crore. The brokers who sold the bonds were Naresh
Aggarwala and Hemendra Kothari.
SBI’s explanation that it had no option but to do the deal on 20 th
September is unchallengeable because it did try to do a ready forward with
RBI and later tried to buy treasury bills and failed on both counts. But there
are two serious flaws in the story. First, on 20 th September when SBI did the
loss-making deals, the entire market knew of a coupon hike!
On 18 th September, Wednesday, the news of the coupon-rate increase
reached the secretariat of all bank chairmen. All state governments wanting
to issue loans got into the act. The Tamil Nadu government had written to all
banks in its state requesting them to subscribe to its loans at the new 12%
rate. The next day, i.e., 19 th September, the news had spread to states like
Orissa and Kerala. SBI, despite knowing that a hike, to take effect from the
next fortnight, had already been announced, continued to trade at the old low
rate.

The second problem with SBI’s logic was its timing. It claims that it was
forced to buy Rs 550 crore of securities because of the dagger of the SLR
dangling over its head. However, the dagger could not have fallen in
September. SBI’s SLR requirement was necessary only for the fortnight
beginning 21 st September. This could have been achieved any time up to the
fortnight ending 5 th October. Indeed, the value dates of SBI’s transactions
were of 5 th October, proving conclusively that for some other reason SBI
rushed to make the deals on 20 th September in the garb of meeting SLR
liability.
SBI’s story of the second coupon hike is an extension of the first. Between
October 1991 to February 1992, the IOC deposit kept rising, to reach Rs
5272 crore by the end of February 1992. That and the normal growth in
SBI’s deposits created fresh SLR targets to be met. In January and February,
treasury bills of Rs 950 crore had matured, leaving a balance of Rs 800 crore
on that account plus a long-term ready forward (LTRF) position of Rs 500
crore in the first week of February. The LTRF position was whittled down to
Rs 350 crore by the third week of February on rumours of a possible coupon
hike. For the rest of the SLR cover, SBI had to buy securities outright.
It bought Rs 375 crore of securities through Naresh Aggarwala on 6 th
March, with a value date of 21 st March. Then it bought another Rs 200
crore of bonds on 9 th March and 12 th March all from the Bank of America.
All these transactions were for a value date of 21 st March. Meanwhile, on
17 th March, the government hiked the coupon rate from 12% to 12.5%. SBI
again suffered losses. However, these were not the dubious transactions.
Those were done on 15 th March and 16 th March with value dates of 18 th
March. These deals were not investigated, nor were the brokers and
counterparty banks questioned. There is enough circumstantial evidence to
raise the suspicion that some banks and brokers knew about the 17 th March
coupon-rate increase.
There was a major row between RBI and the ministry of finance over the
17 th March rate increase. RBI had been stalling it but the ministry was keen
on pushing it through. Eventually, the governor told the finance minister to
take his own decision. For the first time in many decades, the announcement

of a coupon-rate increase came from the ministry, not from RBI. The chief
of a foreign bank, later forced to leave the country, knew about this row
between RBI and the ministry. He may have even “advised” the ministry that
since the market was expecting a hike since January, the hike should come
later rather than sooner, so that “speculators are taught a lesson.” Did this
do-gooder bank chief know exactly when the rate would be hiked?

Too many got away
At the edges of scam territory were industrialists several of whom used
Harshad to rig up their own scrips, a collusion perfunctorily discussed by
JPC. Will the same thing happen this time too? Since late 1991, when the
new-issue pricing was to be freed, these companies were looking forward to
issuing fresh shares after first rigging up their secondary market prices.
Gujarat Ambuja, one of Harshad’s favourites, shot up to Rs 600 and the
company announced an IPO at Rs 200 a share with warrants at Rs 400. The
promoters of GACL continued to hold Harshad in high regard well after the
scam broke.
Industrialists also diverted bank loans and money raised by repeatedly
discounting the same bills, for speculating in their stocks. In October 1992,
when RBI had all but banned bill discounting, top industrialists ganged up to
put tremendous pressure through the ministry of finance and the Prime
Minister’s office to resume the practice. The governor stood his ground.
Among the biggest winners in the whole scam was TB Ruia. He was a
class by himself for having admitted to have taken Rs 125 crore of Stanchart
money and Rs 70 crore of CanMutual’s. By some miracle, this fashionable
businessman was never under pressure and continued to live in great style,
with a fleet of cars, including a Rolls Royce. A few months after the scam
was exposed, he got himself admitted to Bombay Hospital and conveniently
escaped CBI arrest. Later, CBI posted a guard in front of his cabin, who was
used by Ruia to run petty errands for him. “Ruia even managed to get out of
the hospital to travel to Delhi by an Air India flight one night and even travel
overseas later”, said a source. In November, a full six months after Ruia’s

involvement became known, CBI moved in to arrest him. It was pure farce.
When mere suspects were beaten up and abused, Ruia having admitted to
theft, was given a seaside cabin in the CBI office in White House, Bombay.
Later charges against him were dropped altogether.
Peripheral to the scam were lawyers, accountants, etc., the most
interesting of whom is Bansi Mehta, a former president of the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India. Mehta, highly respected in the accounting
profession, was connected to several institutions neck-deep in the scam. He
was the trustee of Canbank Mutual Fund, director of Canbank Financial
Services and auditor of Fairgrowth Financial and Bhupen Dalal’s company,
Cifco. He was also associated with several Birla companies. Apparently, his
firm had signed Fairgrowth’s financial statements as true and fair but later
withdrew it when the Fairgrowth forgery became publicly known. His role
was never probed.
Intriguingly, the late SS Nadkarni, chairman of IDBI, wanted the same
Mehta included in the expert panel set up by RBI to suggest a mechanism of
bond trading. Amitav Ghosh wanted the RBI governor to appoint Bansi
Mehta to audit UCO Bank after the investigation into the misuse of false
bank receipts had started. Mehta, sure was a special person.
Among brokers who have had a miraculous escape was VB Desai & Co.,
a firm that figured in all RBI inspection reports for having done strange
deals with Andhra Bank, the Syndicate Bank and Vijaya Bank. Shroff even
bailed out Harshad just before the scam story broke by getting Allbank
Financial Services to buy ACC shares off Harshad at Rs 10,000. According
to money market players, VBD could well have acted as a front for deals
that were actually meant to benefit Citibank or brokers close to it. Curiously,
VBD always managed to escape any kind of close enquiry – in the past and
for its involvement in the securities scam.
A corollary to the big fish getting away is the small ones getting caught.
Indeed, the common thread running through the post-scam scenario is junior
officials getting the axe, though in almost all the cases they have acted for
the benefit of institutions they were working for. C Ravi Kumar and S
Suresh Babu alone have been blamed for the mess at NHB despite the fact
that there was an active chairman, executive director, advisor and

government directors. Of course, later even these two officers escaped even
though JPC established that they had been bribed. AN Bavadekar who was
hauled up along with Hashad Mehta and the other accused in May 1992 is at
worst guilty of countersigning a few cheques issued by SBI’s treasury
department. SBI was not even able to provide him a description of his job
profile. Nine years later his life and career are completely destroyed and the
trial seems no signs of going anywhere. It is the same with his colleague K
Kailasam.
Citibank cleverly guarded itself. But when Power Finance Corporation
produced a letter belying Citibank’s claim that it had never guaranteed
returns, Citibank blamed a junior official in Delhi for it – a standard
technique of foreign companies. Stanchart’s first reaction was to
indiscriminately sack and demote its junior employees irrespective of their
role in the scam. It took the bank a much longer time to revamp its internal
controls. The nine years of trial at the Special Court in Bombay, has never
required the presence of its top brass as witnesses. Air India has suspended
just two middle-level officers for its PMS deals. The list goes on.
In the scam, banks were acting in concert with the brokers to fund each
other and cover each other’s losses. Yet the investigation focused primarily
on the brokers and only a few bank officials like those of SBI. Many top
bankers escaped interrogation and arrest despite having driven their
institutions straight into the scam. KR Nayak, chairman of Andhra Bank,
was allowed to retire, despite Andhra Bank Financial’s huge exposure to
Fairgrowth. Allahabad Bank and its subsidiary, Allbank Finance, did several
suspect deals with the Calcutta-based broker C Mackertich. Allahabad
Bank’s chairman, RL Wadhwa, retired a month before the scam broke and
was never questioned.
More intriguing is the case of JS Varshneya, former chairman of the
Punjab National Bank, also a director in Harshad’s Growmore Asset
Management and an advisor to the National Housing Bank. Varshneya was
allowed to retire into oblivion. RS Pai, chairman of Syndicate Bank, which
openly favoured Fairgrowth and Reliance Industries, was simply asked to go
on leave. The JPC ought to have found out who or what stopped CBI from
asking all these bank chairmen a few tough questions.

Other chairmen continued to stay on despite having led their banks into
suspect deals. For instance, the big dad of the financial sector Industrial
Development Bank of India had a deep nexus with Citibank. Its chief SS
Nadkarni, later chief of SEBI, was not looked at with suspicion. IDBI had
ten different portfolio accounts with Citibank. While continuing to be the
owner of some units, IDBI physically handed them over to Citibank, which
then traded in them. This meant that “units which were held by the customer
in his own investment portfolio were now held by him as an investment of
his PMS account”, says the Janakiraman report. This is a clear case of illegal
collusion between two venerable institutions. Nobody was hauled up.
Most of the brokers have done fairly well for themselves. Ajay Kayan has
continued to do fairly well moving in and out of his large speculative
positions and investments. He was named as bear operator in Scam 2001 but
there is hardly anything yet to pin on him. The professionals, depending on
their competence have done well too. Alok Aggarwal, head of BankAm’s
treasury is now in Reliance. KR Bharat and Prashant Purkar left Citibank,
went to ITC Classic and from there to the sharp-shooting Peregrine which
went bust.
Bharat ended up in Credit Suisse First Boston, which was smack in the
middle of Scam 2001. Fast-talking S Ramesh Kumar joined Reliance Capital
from Citibank, left for Times Guarantee and faded away. Bhupen Dalal was
acquitted from several cases, but has never recovered to rebuild a business
that was shattered in just a few months after three generations of efforts.
Jerry Rao resurrected himself as software CEO (MphasiS BFL) and so did
Vikram Talwar, former head of BankAm.
Those who passed away
Even before the scam investigations were on, two key players, MJ
Pherwani and B Ratnakar, passed away. With Pherwani’s demise, it remains
a mystery what exactly happened in NHB and why the man, who had
blacklisted the Mehtas while he headed UTI, went out of his way to help
Harshad. Had Pherwani been alive the very expensive dispute between ANZ
and NHB may not have happened. The same goes for B Ratnakar, whose
demise two months before the scam broke, allowed Nedungadi Bank to be
passed on to the hands of a BSE broker. It remains mired in controversies

with RBI watching from the sidelines. Ratnakar’s protégé K Dharmapal died
in April 1999, distraught and entangled in the huge mess that Fairgrowth
was. Bhupen Dalal’s able lieutenant JP Gandhi, central to the trades
attributed to the Dalal-Stanchart group, passed away too. Another important
blow to the scam investigation was the death in a road accident of SG
Ghade, a Deputy Inspector General of CBI. With his exit, an important link
to the scam investigation vanished.
Among others to have expired were three SBI officials. One of them was
genial CL Khemani, a heart patient, who was an accused in the SBI case, but
against whom CBI could prove nothing. When we met him in mid-1992, a
shattered Khemani, who had made huge money for SBI, said: “If CBI arrests
me again, I will commit suicide.” The SBI Chairman when the scam broke,
MN Goiporia died quietly in his retirement after being forced to quit by the
ministry of finance. RL Kamat, who had gone to Palani to nab Sitaraman
under instructions from Khemani, was dealt cruelly by fate for his efforts.
Gold ornaments kept in vault for his daughter’s wedding were frozen and
were yet to be released. He died a few years ago.
What about Harshad Mehta who indirectly wreaked so much havoc? He
wanted to be a Citibank or Merrill Lynch but lost everything – image, money
and his heroic market dominance. But Harshad did not lose his sense for
drama, the ability to spring the big surprise and his pathological bullishness.
The day he was released from 110 days in captivity, in September 1992 he
was being celebrated like a war hero. Outside the unfinished third floor of
Madhuli, six gun-toting policemen were sitting around. Inside, a celebratory
mood gripped the Mehta household. Relatives, friends, employees and
fellow brokers streamed in and out as Harshad spent his waking hours
posing in front of the video cameras of ATN, Eye Witness and Newstrack
and talking to countless magazines and newspapers. His untrammelled
optimism after 110 days of ordeal and what he was going to face was queer.
But he immediately dropped out of public consciousness while continuing
to live in a dream world of his own. “The whole game is one of perception”,
he said. Juggling perception and reality like a deft magician, Harshad was
clear in his own mind that he has done nothing really wrong because other
more respected institutions, too, have done equally criminal acts.

“Everybody was in the scam. In the end what made the difference was who
had the time to cook the books and use influence and who didn’t”, he says.
He also appeared more introspective. What were his drawbacks? “I am
more imaginative than practical. I did not have the chance to work in a
disciplined environment. For three years I was a clerk in New India
Assurance. I did not have the qualification to build things professionally. I
was going on as if there is no tomorrow.” Well, his vision of tomorrow was
inverted and his sense of reality fractured. His eyes brightened when he
talked about the future. He wanted to make Rs 5000 crore of profits. So,
what did he do towards that? He planned a comeback in 1998, a splashy reentry by doing the same old thing in the same old manner. That’s the bridge
to Scam 2001.

Chapter 18
Harshad’s Return
In the grand dramatic
style that was his
hallmark, Harshad
stunned the nation by
stating in an affidavit
that he and his
brother Ashwin had
paid Rs one crore to
the PM.

What was Harshad, the most high-profile member of 1992 scam doing all
these years? Restless and daring, he has been up to a lot of tricks: like
charging a Prime Minister with accepting a bribe and rigging stock prices.
It was the afternoon of 16 th June 1993. A few men huddled behind the
closed doors of room 262 at Bombay’s Taj Mahal hotel were getting ready to
create history. Around 3.30 p.m. the phone, busy throughout the afternoon,
rang once again. It was a last ditch effort, but too late. At 4 p.m. Harshad
Mehta, his brother Ashwin and their flamboyant lawyers Ram Jethmalani,
Mahesh Jethmalani and a few others marched out to the Ball Room of the
Taj. Harshad, the symbol of the biggest-ever financial scandal, was about to
stun the nation again by answering one of the big unanswered questions
about the scam.
Since April 1992, there were plenty of revelations of intricate transactions,
the huge wealth of brokers, the violations by banks and there were dramatic
arrests. But the spiciest question remained unanswered: were politicians
involved? When Harshad faced the JPC in November 1992, that was what
everybody wanted to know. But Harshad’s lips were sealed. He said “Never

have I got any favour from a single politician nor have I paid any politician.”
He made a similar declaration about bureaucrats.
On 16 th June 1993, just over a year after he was arrested, Harshad spoke
out. And in the grand dramatic style that was his hallmark. Harshad stunned
the nation by stating in an affidavit that he and his brother Ashwin had
personally paid Rs one crore to PV Narasimha Rao. It was a donation for the
then PM’s Nandyal by-election – a transaction brokered by then Congress
MP, the late Satpal Mittal and his son Sunil Mittal who now heads Bharti
BT. Harshad provided a lot of corroborative details. He said that he had gone
over to the PM’s Race Course Road residence on 4 th November 1991 with
his brother and Sunil Mittal. After the usual pleasantries and Harshad’s
discourse on the stock markets, they handed over a suitcase containing Rs 67
lakh to the PM, who allegedly instructed that the money should be kept with
his officer on special duty RK Khandekar.
The Mehtas described in dramatic detail how they lugged
Rs 67 lakh in a suitcase from Bombay to Delhi, how they forgot to leave the
key to the loaded suitcase with the PM’s secretary Khandekar, how the PM
was impressed by their idea of swapping government debt against public
sector’s equity, how he touched the bag and blessed them... The next day, the
Mehtas sent over another suitcase containing Rs 33 lakh.
The PMO flatly denied the charge and tried to discredit the brokers’
allegations. There was no record of Harshad’s entry to the PM’s highlyguarded residence. Some of the biggest newspapers in the country,
questioned whether Rs 67 lakh fit into a soft luggage case. Harshad held a
second press conference to demonstrate how the cash could, indeed, be
packed in a suitcase of similar dimensions. He also distributed a tape of his
conversation with Sunil Mittal in which he pleaded for help and had trapped
Mittal into speaking about their visit to the PM’s office.
What did his so-called contribution to the PM fetch? In January 1992,
when Harshad and a couple of his sub-brokers were facing disciplinary
action by BSE, he approached his newfound friends at the PMO. He claims
that instructions came down from Khandekar to minister of state for finance
Dalbir Singh from there down to Paul Joseph who was then joint director
(stock exchanges) and a BSE governing board member. At the board

meeting, Joseph played his part and took strong objection to tough
disciplinary action against the broker and Harshad was let off leniently. That
incident enhanced his reputation of being powerfully connected. Predictably,
however, Joseph denied having received any instructions regarding the
meeting.
But why did Harshad suddenly charge the PM with corruption? He
privately told us that there were attempts to frame him under the dreaded
COFEPOSA. Harshad feared for his life because he knew too much. Also,
once remanded under COFEPOSA, he could have been buried in jail as an
under-trail for the next decade or more.
But there was one question for which there were no answers: why was
there no deal between Harshad and the PM? If Harshad Mehta was a crook
and swindler, Rao was no angel. He was widely believed to have been
involved in a crude forgery that attempted to smear
VP Singh and his son Ajeya Singh for holding illegal foreign accounts. He
was steeped in the patronage-favour-payoff and deal-making culture of
Indian politics that embodies two crucial codes. First, everybody has a price
and two, nobody squeals. Despite widespread corruption, even minor
politicos don’t get caught, let alone Members of the Parliament. Prime
Ministers getting caught or even being publicly accused by a stockbroker is
out of the question, because there is always a deal. If there is no deal, then
there is the brute force of the State and its various arms to silence an
attempted blackmail. So why did the State fail to suppress Harshad? Why
was there no deal between the PM and him? What follows is the chain of
events and interpretation according to the Mehtas.
According to them, when Harshad was in jail (between 4 th June and 22 nd
September), they received various feelers to pay and settle all their
problems. Demands ranged from Rs 50 crore to Rs 200 crore, part of the
money to be paid abroad. The message carriers varied from a religious
leader to small time political functionaries. Harshad was apparently against
the idea of paying money. Besides, assets of twenty-nine entities controlled
by the Mehtas had already been frozen and attached; they did not have that
kind of money free. The demand was accompanied by threats. One of them
was: Harshad would be indefinitely kept behind bars. Indeed, for over 111
days, CBI, enforce-ment and income tax departments worked in tandem to

keep Harshad in jail when others were released after a month in custody.
During the last stage of his custody, Ashwin got Harshad to write out the
various payoffs they had made.
All through this, did CBI, Rao’s aides, top bureaucrats and some
politicians know that the PM was “involved”? Harshad was arrested on 4 th
June. As early as on 12 th June, Mohan Khandelwal, Mehtas’ man in Delhi
was interrogated by the CBI officials. He was later quizzed by the CBI chief
SK Datta. Khandelwal revealed everything. Apparently, his statement to
Datta was not recorded. The government perhaps wanted to make
Khandelwal an ‘approver’ (State witness), to make Harshad the scapegoat
and exonerate the politicians. K Madhavan, heading CBI’s investigation in
Bombay, apparently refused to go along with the third part of this strategy
and resigned. As part of the same plan Hiten Dalal, Bhupen Dalal and a
whole lot of others were arrested and jailed.
While Harshad was in jail, the Mehtas claim to have contacted Sunil
Mittal. Mittal apparently told them that he had suddenly become a pariah
and could not get past the PM’s secretary. Later, Mittal himself became
inaccessible to the Mehtas. All this while, the PM’s aides and CBI were
watching the situation, perhaps convinced that Harshad would not speak out.
At one stage Harshad claims he was apparently told to explain the Rs one
crore payment, as having been made to the late Satpal Mittal, father of Sunil
Mittal. This was most convenient because dead men do not speak. Then, on
11 th November 1992, Manmohan Sharma, secretary to Satpal Mittal,
apparently contacted Harshad at Holiday Inn, Delhi. Harshad was to appear
before JPC, the next day. Sharma, worried for himself and Sunil Mittal,
requested Harshad to stay mum. Harshad told him that he and his family
were afraid of a backlash and assured him of his silence.
Around this time, the crisis management team close to the PM may have
decided that it was better to step up the pressure on Harshad and keep him
cornered, rather than rely on his good senses to keep quiet. It was at this time
that the Mehtas suspect that the plan to implicate them in the narcotics
business began to be hatched. The Mehtas knew that allegations of drug
trafficking would destroy them completely. “We decided to collect and
arrange all evidence”, said Ashwin Mehta calmly. The Mehtas were also

scared for Harshad’s life. They recorded his testimony on videotape and ran
to star lawyers the Jethmalanis. The war of nerves was escalating. But before
that, Manmohan Sharma was supposed to have appeared on the scene. He
apparently spent about an hour with Ashwin Mehta in late January 1993 and
requested them to stay away from political games. Mehta claims to have told
him that all they are doing is compiling the evidence they already had.
On 9 th February, CBI called Harshad for interrogation and asked him
about the Rs 45 lakh cash withdrawals on 4 th November 1991 from ANZ
Grindlays Bank, Sansad Marg branch. According to the Mehtas, CBI
avoided asking about their 4 th November meeting with the PM. Harshad
replied that he could not recall the reason for the withdrawals. Then the
Income Tax department asked Harshad to clarify the Rs 45 lakh question
under oath. The Mehtas felt that CBI and IT were working in tandem to trap
them: CBI’s interrogation is not admissible as evidence but a statement made
to the Income Tax department under oath can be used by anybody including
CBI. If only Harshad repeated to IT authorities under oath what he told CBI
(that he did not remember what he did with the money) that would have
exonerated the beneficiary of the money, in this case, allegedly, the PM.
To thwart the CBI-IT combine (that had earlier trapped
R Sitaraman, the SBI officer who was hand-in-glove with Harshad)
Harshad’s lawyer Mahesh Jethmalani wrote a letter to SK Datta, the CBI
chief, pointing out that the cash withdrawals were politically sensitive in
nature and that Harshad could disclose them only if he got immunity from
political persecution. Datta, past his retirement age, had been holding his job
on extensions. Under Datta, CBI attempted to discredit K Madhavan, lied
about Harshad’s Swiss bank accounts (more about this later), tried to
implicate him in narcotics and refused to pursue some obvious trails. When
Jethmalani’s letter reached him, he kept mum and the JPC was not informed.
When IT authorities interrogated Harshad between February 18-22, 1993
he steadfastly refused to answer questions relating to the cash withdrawals.
According to the interrogation transcripts, Harshad wanted to consult his
lawyer before he answered, asked for more time and put the IT’s ball in
CBI’s court: “I can answer the question after receiving a reply from CBI on
my request for immunity.” When Harshad’s camp managed to stymie IT,

CBI had to return to the scene. It despatched an officer to talk to Jethmalani.
Nothing came of it. Five days later CBI replied that it could not offer any
kind of immunity.
The Mehtas believe that the strategy to implicate Harshad in narcotics,
silence him on the payoffs and pressure him through interrogation began to
slow down after Jethmalani’s letter. But there were four FIRs and fifteen
raids after 17 th February. During the raids, the CBI officers did not pick up
any papers. They were looking for cavities and hidden areas in the house.
Meanwhile, was a deal being worked out? Harshad and his lawyer
Mahesh Jethmalani refused to admit it. If so, it fell through because on 14 th
May, three months later, Jethmalani’s letter to CBI appeared in Business
Standard . It is likely that the Harshad camp had leaked the letter in order to
force the issue out. In fact, the presence of Ram Jethmalani – who was more
a politician, loved publicity and was never shy of controversy – made it clear
that there would be a fight and not a deal. There is nothing Ram Jethmalani
likes more than a politically sensational issue.
Once Harshad’s letter was publicised, the momentum began to build up.
In a remarkable coincidence, the day Business Standard was going to press
with the story about Jethmalani’s letter, Manmohan Sharma was back in
Bombay. Sharma and the Mehtas are believed to have had a two-hour lunch
at Copper Chimney, a well-known restaurant close to Madhuli – the Mehtas’
residence. Sharma was apparently conciliatory and soft. The Mehtas say they
asked him why he had suddenly changed his stance. He replied that
environment keeps changing. Sharma confidently told them that even if they
spoke, nothing was going to happen to the PM. Sharma did not reveal who
he was acting for. The Mehtas perhaps decided to sit tight unless they were
sure that the moves were coming from the highest level. This was one of the
last and weak efforts at a deal. When nothing was worked out, the Mehtas,
egged on by the flamboyant Jethmalanis, called a press conference and
dropped the bombshell. And true to the PM’s astute calculations, nothing
quite came out of it.
Meanwhile, doubts surfaced about the exact time at which the Mehtas
went to the PM’s residence. Very mysteriously, Harshad contradicted himself

over this several weeks after his revelations, indirectly strengthening the
PM’s case. Was Harshad trying to let off the PM as part of a deal? Nobody
knows, but the heat was suddenly off Harshad Mehta and the narcotics
charge was never brought up again.
Same actor, same role
For three years after that startling event fizzled out, Harshad lay low. Then
over the next two years he attempted three comebacks and ended up rattling
the market each time with his shenanigans. Twice he had allegedly
introduced benami shares into the market, paralysing the system. The third
time he appeared as a glorified tipster aided by mesmerised newspaper
editors and managers. The amazing thing is that each time he has been
helped by the same set of six odd brokers about whom the regulator has been
surprisingly benign – until recently.
Harshad first planned a comeback in December 1996. The market sensed
Harshad’s hand in the sudden spurt in the prices of three Jindal group shares.
Both the Jindals and Harshad Mehta denied the rumours, but market
operators insist that Harshad’s play in Jindal Strips, Saw Pipes and Jindal
Iron & Steel had fizzled out in a few weeks with losses to the Jindals.
Harshad told The Times of India in January 1997 “first of all let me tell you,
I don’t want to be involved in any pulling or pushing of prices.” That
resolution, if true, was soon abandoned.
On 3 rd March 1997, he appeared on a Rediff-chat announcing plans for a
comeback. Playing on investors’ greed, he grandly announced that the BSE
sensitive index would touch 7000. Simultaneously, he announced plans to set
up a website to dispense tips and analyse corporate trends. If Harshad had
paid careful attention to that chat, he would have anticipated his problems. It
was clear that while he still attracted incredible public interest, the blind
adulation of the past was missing. There were too many who were downright
disbelieving. For instance, someone asked him – “Would you consider
yourself gainfully employed or otherwise between occupations? How do you
pull off the lifestyle in spite of claiming that you are broke...?” There was
more in this vein, but Harshad was undeterred. He decided that the public at
large and the retail investors were his constituency and so his comeback

should be through the media. His strategy: use important media fixers to get
himself columns in important newspapers to dispense his tips and opinions.
At the top of his list was The Times of India , the very paper that undid
him in 1992. He almost made it there with the help of some top managers
but for the strong objections raised by then editorial advisor HK Dua.
However, he managed to gatecrash into another Times Group paper the
Navbharat Times . His friendly media brokers fixed his columns by peddling
two arguments. One, circulation would soar as Harshad’s charisma would
have investors rushing to buy up their newspapers. Two, so long as Harshad
was merely an accused in the scam, what was so wrong in his being a
columnist? BSE had also hung on to this argument to avoid expelling the
broker. Harshad Mehta had more than one card on the BSE, which are only
suspended. His newspaper columns and website set the market buzzing
again.
As an investment columnist, his technique was essentially the same: work
at rigging a stock along with the management by putting out a tip in the
market and creating endless hype. Harshad positioned himself as a champion
of the small investors but attracted speculators and some retail investors as
he took BPL from Rs 40 to Rs 400. However, his well-laid plans went
haywire. At the peak of his leveraged position, India conducted a nuclear test
in June 1998. Foreigners panicked, pulled out money and the market simply
melted. He did not have the endless supply of bank funds to sustain his
positions. When the bottom fell out, brokers operating for Harshad Mehta
failed to pay up plunging BSE into a payment crisis. The crisis was clumsily
hushed by BSE officials, a few brokers and the companies whose shares
were being rigged.
Harshad Mehta’s reputation as the born-again messiah of small investors
was simply a myth created by a set of spin-doctors. SEBI’s investigations
later showed that the Big Bull was merely a brazen market manipulator,
ramping up prices through a set of seven front companies and eighteen
brokers. These companies had cornered 70% of the total stock traded in BPL
Ltd. and 50% of deliverable trade in Videocon and Sterlite. Clearly, small
investors were not exactly rushing to invest their money in the four Harshad
scrips; the majority was watching to see if his magic would last.

Unlike 1992, Mehta’s hype and media columns had obviously failed to
enthuse investors. All it did was to generate very short speculative
transactions by other operators who made a quick buck but were not left
holding the ramped up stocks. The bulk of the stock seems to have remained
within Harshad Mehta’s cartel of twenty-odd brokers. Since 1998 was
different from 1992 (no access to bank funds), he floundered within six
months. SEBI began an excruciatingly slow and hesitant investigation into
the June 1998 payment problem. Even when it had clear evidence of price
manipulation, it dithered and delivered its verdict only in April 2001 after
the Ketan Parekh scam suddenly turned the spotlight on SEBI’s long list of
other inactions.
Harshad Mehta was not the only scam-accused to have attempted repeated
comebacks. The same set of BSE brokers like Rajendra Banthia, Ajay Kayan
and, of course, Ketan Parekh, who figured in the 1992 scam have been
involved directly and indirectly in the scam of 2001. SEBI has been aware of
Banthia’s close links with Harshad Mehta and the CBI investigations against
him but allowed him to become the treasurer of the BSE and later its vice
president.
In 1995, Banthia was involved in a huge inter-exchange operation (in
Pune and other exchanges) to hammer the Reliance scrip. SEBI
investigators, after a two-year effort, had categorical proof to link Banthia
with the 1995 price manipulations. Though action was initiated against other
exchanges, the broker was allowed to get away, ostensibly due to his
political connections. SEBI did not even ask him to step down from the
powerful BSE post.
In the payment crises caused by Harshad’s price rigging, Banthia played a
lead role in BSE’s bail out of Harshad’s brokers. BSE denied that there was a
payment problem and refused to declare a single defaulter. The SEBI
chairman, DR Mehta was also perceived as an active supporter of the BSE
bailout operation, even while the more efficient NSE declared six brokers as
defaulters.
SEBI was not alone in failing to check Harshad Mehta and his cronies.
The finance ministry, under the Congress as well as the United Front
government was well aware that a coterie of brokers with large inter-

exchange transactions has openly manipulated markets. Yet, it did nothing to
instil confidence in the regulatory process.
The Press Council of India, in response to a complaint filed by Manubhai
Shah, managing trustee of the Consumer Education and Research Centre of
Ahmedabad had passed orders against newspapers who legitimised Harshad
Mehta’s manipulation and helped him influence investors by publishing his
columns. Until then, the Council, which had brought out a code of conduct
for business journalists way back in 1996, had simply stood by as Harshad
openly misused the media.
No longer just an accused
Editors and smart media managers were keen to launch Harshad as the
investment messiah with the argument that Harshad was merely an accused
and had not been convicted. The excuse was no longer valid. In September
1999, Justice MS Rane convicted Harshad Mehta, in a relatively small Rs 38
crore Maruti Udyog case, dealing him a big blow. Finally, Harshad was no
long the main accused in the securities scam, he was convicted.
He now has twenty-seven cases filed against him, has been convicted to
five years rigorous imprisonment in one, has been acquitted in two and has
appealed to the Supreme Court against his conviction. He has also appealed
against SEBI’s life time ban against him from capital market activities
because of his 1998 shenanigans.
His hair has thinned and is streaked with grey, the face is a little tired and
the frame a few kilos bulkier. Yet on the day of his conviction Harshad
Mehta continued to smile. When he told the media horde “We have faith in
the judiciary. We will appeal to the Supreme Court.” He wasn’t just putting
on a brave face after being convicted in the first completed scam case. That
was quintessential Harshad, the first superstar of the stock markets, an
eternal optimist. In June 1992, when he was released from 110 days of
custody, he told Sucheta: “Congratulations. You have broken the story of the
decade.” It was typical Harshad, an infectious ability to revel even in the
glare of negative publicity. It is this quality that saw him make repeated
attempts to recapture the limelight. What will he do next?

Chapter 19
Justice Delayed
The biggest function
of the Special Court
over the last seven
years has been to
decide whether
notified persons
could leave Bombay
for even short trips.

What an excruciatingly painful experience the scam
investigation and trial have turned out to be. The court,
CBI, RBI, Income Tax department, the Custodian, the Enforcement
Directorate… all have ensured that the wheels of justice move at a snail’s
pace. Remember, under a hastily drafted ordinance, all cases relating to the
scam were supposed to be heard only by the Special Court. There, some
600-odd civil cases are pending. The number would have been larger but for
the sensible decision of some foreign banks to write off their losses instead
of pressing charges. Very few cases have been heard or have reached a
conclusion. At the current pace, the trial would carry on for the next two
decades.
CBI has filed seventy-two charge-sheets for criminal offences, of which
only four have gone anywhere. CBI quietly abandoned several important
trails. Investigation into Goldstar Steel, which involved Prime Minister
Narasimha Rao’s sons and Hiten Dalal is in limbo, as is the case against
former union minister B Shankaranand who was one of the two ministers
who resigned in the aftermath of the scam.
Of the cases that have come to some conclusion, the first, convicted Hiten
Dalal for bouncing of cheques that Stanchart had sent for clearing five

months after the date of issue. Hiten, in turn, sued Stanchart and its officer
for perjury, contempt and for giving false evidence against him. He claimed
that the cheques were not meant to be deposited and were given as a sort of
surety against a deal which was later completed. On 11 th July 2001, the
Supreme Court dismissed Hiten’s appeal and convicted him to one year’s
imprisonment. It was the first Supreme Court conviction of the 1992 scam.
The second criminal case was about just Rs 11,000 involving State Bank of
Saurashtra. The trial went on for a few months and led to the acquittal of the
accused. The third, involving Rs 30 crore of ‘Cancigo’ units of CanMutual,
led to a seven-year conviction of Hiten Dalal and S Mohan, a Canfina
employee. The Supreme Court has stayed the matter.
Then in September 1999 Justice MS Rane dealt Harshad Mehta the first
big legal blow by convicting him in a relatively small
Rs 38 crore Maruti Udyog case. As scam cases go, this one involving
misappropriation of funds was insignificant – the money had come back to
Maruti which itself was reluctant to pursue the case.
A day before the judgement, Harshad’s lawyers were extremely confident
of an acquittal. For Harshad, who had already attempted a failed comeback
as a columnist-and-market operator, an acquittal would have given him a
chance to claim that this was an indicator of how all twenty-seven cases
against him would eventually be settled. Since none of the other cases was
anywhere near completion, nobody would have been any wiser for a few
more years and by then, the general public, notorious for its short memory
would have lost all interest in the 1992 scam. In fact, Harshad’s brazen
comeback in 1998 was based precisely on the plank that he was merely an
accused and not a convict. Justice Rane’s judgement put paid to that
argument.
Much of the litigation is civil disputes, which are now meaningless. In this
nine-year period, the disputed money would have more than trebled and the
saving in terms of time and cost of litigation would have been a bonus. In
retrospect, foreign banks that quietly wrote off their losses and settled claims
without publicity seem really smart. The nationalised banks did not have the
luxury of taking such decisions.

The scam happened under a creaking system and poor regulatory
framework, making the hundreds of disputed transactions extremely
complicated. It has been difficult for Judges to understand them without
some expert help, but the court never sought any. The Judges have been
trying to unravel intricate securities deals while conducting the hearings.
Ironically, after seven years of this learning experience, Justice Sam Variava
was elevated to the Supreme Court and Justice Rane who succeeded him
retired soon after. The Special Court is now headed by Justice SH Kapadia
along with Justice DK Trivedi. There is now a loose division of the civil and
criminal cases; Justice Kapadia is largely in charge of the civil cases barring
a few where he is hearing both the civil and criminal charges. Justice Trivedi
has most of the criminal cases in his court.
As the litigations trundle along, the prosecution faces other handi-caps.
Several key accused or witnesses have passed away; all members of the
initial investigation team of CBI have been transferred, promoted or have
retired. The country heads and treasury chiefs of all foreign banks have all
quit and many are no longer in the country.
In contrast, scores of middle and junior level officers of Indian banks,
people with no clout have been implicated in the scam, often for technical
offences, have simply been destroyed. Many of them are either innocent or
guilty of nothing more than negligence. For them justice is nowhere in sight,
their careers have been ruined and they have been bankrupted by the sheer
cost of defending themselves. Abandoned by their organisations, most of
them have no funds to ensure legal defence or deal with the slow and often
corrupt investigation process.
The Custodian has attached properties, money and shares of the accused
but most of it remains locked up. There are 39.5 million shares registered in
the name of ‘notified’ parties of which the majority belong to the Harshad
Mehta Group. The total value of registered shares in the Custodian was at
one time Rs 658 crore. There are 18.9 million unregistered shares with the
Custodian and 8.07 million benami shares. They belong to approximately
300 companies. The Custodian had also set up an expert ‘disposal’
committee to advise it on the sale of shares belonging to notified persons.
But this too is caught up in litigation. An apex court verdict in January 2001

seemed to signal a final green light for the sale, but the accused have filed
another last ditch appeal causing another delay.
In what sounds straight out of Ripley’s Believe-it-or-not , the biggest
function of the Special Court over the last seven years has been decide
whether notified persons could leave Bombay for even short trips (this
included the suburb of Thane which is an hour long drive from Bombay). By
30 th October 1999, the Special Court disposed off 14,927 such applications.
Such a stringent condition was not applicable even to the accused on trial for
the devastating serial bomb blasts which rocked Bombay in 1993.
Each application involved a cost of around Rs 10,000; it needed an
affidavit in four copies, lawyers’ fees and at least ten minutes of the court’s
time to look at the application and dictate an order. Often, the procedure took
longer because the Judge used to interrogate the accused on their reasons for
travel and sometimes rejected permission. Sometimes the court worked out a
rough cost of the trip and asked the accused to deposit approximately that
amount with the Custodian. Occasionally, the accused have simply dropped
their travel plans when faced with these conditions. Finally, in response to an
application by Bhupen Dalal in 2000, the court dropped all restriction on
travel by the accused within the country.
The court also hears innumerable applications from the accused asking the
Custodian to release money for their lawyers’ fees. The Harshad Mehta
Group alone has probably moved 50 such applications over the years.
Soon after the court began its hearings in 1993, there was a need to flush
out benami shares. These were shares held in street names by the scamaccused in 1992, which they are believed to have dumped in the market soon
after investigations began, in order to recover money. Anybody who bought
the shares with the stamp of a scam-accused on the transfer deed, needed to
have the shares certified as clean after proving that the transaction was bona
fide. The shares could have been passed to a genuine buyer through as many
as ten accused persons. In one case, an investor needed thirty-two such
statements. Often brokers simply refused to oblige because their records
were in CBI custody. As usual, some brokers found a way around the
problem and quickly dematerialised the shares.

Clearly, there was enormous scope for a clean up. The certification
process, permission to travel and disposal of shares and assets with the
Custodian had no business taking up the court’s time. As for civil cases, if
the court chooses to use some expert advice, the 600-odd cases can be settled
or be persuaded to be settled through withdrawal or the filing of consent
terms. But this requires a thorough study, application of mind and decisive
action.
Had the scam investigation been a public inquiry, it would have attracted
more participation from the affected investors and emboldened people to
come forward with information and evidence. Justice MC Chagla, who
conducted the Haridas Mundhra trial, which was the first big financial scam
of independent India had said in 1956: “After very anxious consideration I
have decided that this enquiry should be held in public. A public enquiry
constitutes a very important safeguard for ensuring that the decision will be
fair and impartial. The public is entitled to know on what evidence the
decision is based. Members of the public will also be in a position to come
forward at any stage to throw more light on the facts disclosed by evidence.
Justice should never be cloistered – it should be administered in broad
daylight.” He also decided to take evidence on oath so that “those who gave
evidence did so with a sense of responsibility and the knowledge of the
consequences of giving false testimony.” The Mundhra enquiry was wrapped
up in two years including the appeal to the Supreme Court.
In contrast, the JPC insisted on a closed-door investigation with a
selective briefing to journalists at the end of each day. The investigation lost
its relevance ever since. We now have another scam to deal with and another
JPC to probe it which has chosen to follow exactly the same procedure as the
1992 hearings. Are we going to get anything other than a cover up? Look at
what we got last time.
The farce of JPC
JPC members fumbled through a mass of documents and furiously
debated whether to call ministers for questioning – as if that would throw
any light on where the money had gone and how. Strangely, nobody wanted
to address this question. The JPC report was the result of unseemly horsetrading that did precious little for the system. The most startling trail that got

lost was Harshad’s open allegation at a press conference that he had bribed
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao.
Harshad was summoned to the JPC hearings again on 30 th June 1993
following his allegation against the PM earlier in the month. He admitted to
having paid several politicians, but claimed that he could not furnish proof.
He also admitted that his charge against the PM was an act of desperation to
protect himself from harassment. He promised to reveal the names of other
politicians he had bribed, only if he was given immunity. Asked what sort of
immunity he was seeking, Harshad told the JPC, “Immunity from various
unjust investigations that are going on one particular path to chase me.”
Despite his vivid testimony about cash withdrawal from State Bank of India
and ANZ Grindlays, carrying it on an Indian Airlines flight to Delhi and his
narration of how the payment resulted in immediate gains to himself in the
form of leniency by BSE on over-speculation, his charge was ignored.
In a note attached to the JPC report, some opposition MPs
(in 1992) including Jaswant Singh, George Fernandes, S Jaipal Reddy,
Gurudas Dasgupta and others complained about how, other than Harshad
Mehta, no other witness connected with the bribery episode could be
examined by the Committee. They grumbled about CBI’s non-co-operation
and blamed it for arriving at “conclusions with unnatural haste.” They finally
disposed off the issue by demanding “in this entire matter of allegations of
payment of Rs 1 crore by Shri Harshad Mehta, there is need for further
detailed investigation under the Commission of Enquiry Act. We also hold
that the findings of such enquiry ought to be submitted to the Parliament
within six months of institution.”
However, this note was countered by another one from loyal Congress
MPs which said that “there were several inherent contradictions” in Harshad
Mehta’s testimony and that “the records available with the Committee do not
substantiate the allegations” made by Mehta about bribing the PM. They
charged that he could not substantiate his charge of ‘political patronage’
having allowed him to ‘wriggle out of the problems faced by him in the
Bombay Stock Exchange.’ Thus, the most serious charge against a sitting
Prime Minister, backed by substantial proof was dismissed.

Another cover up involved Romesh Bhandari, the then Governor of
Tripura. He had allegedly masterminded a conspiracy to malign some
political leaders by attempting to link them to certain payoffs from the
foreign accounts of Harshad Mehta. Here too the Congress loyalists argued
that the issue did not fall within the purview of JPC’s terms of reference. A
note from the opposition MPs pointed out that Bhandari had obtained
“affidavits, even from a foreigner and smuggler relating to the Committee’s
work”, and withheld information about hawala transactions of Harshad
Mehta from the Committee. The MPs charged that explanations from the
government on the issue were ‘wholly unsatisfactory’ and demanded a report
to Parliament on the issue within six months. Nothing ever came of it.
The third case relating to Narasimha Rao involved his sons and a
Hyderabad-based company called Goldstar Steel and Alloys Ltd. In April
1992, scamster Hiten P Dalal withdrew Rs two crore from his account at
Andhra Bank and paid the money to Goldstar, through Andhra Bank
Financial Services. Deposing before the JPC, Goldstar’s managing director
N Krishna Mohan said that the money was meant to shore up subscriptions
to its rights issue, which was floundering and scheduled to close on 11 th
May 1992.
Narasimha Rao’s son PV Prabhakara Rao was closely connected with
Goldstar and it was clear that Hiten’s generosity was influenced by that
connection. Goldstar offered various flimsy explanations, which were
discredited by JPC’s investigation. It ordered an inquiry by SEBI, which
concluded that an inspection of Goldstar’s records and books of account
were justified to verify details of the money received by the promoters.
The JPC too asked for an inquiry by a joint team comprising SEBI, CBI,
Department of Company Affairs, RBI and Central Board of Direct Taxes.
Ultimately, the only person who paid a price for the Goldstar investigation
was the former SEBI chief GV Ramakrishna. His fair and impartial report
apparently angered the PM and he was summarily kicked upstairs to the
Planning Commission.
The JPC report was also highly unusual. Though the core report was
submitted as the unanimous views of the group of MPs, the crucial issues
connected with the bribery allegations against Narasimha Rao, his sons’

shenanigans with Goldstar and Romesh Bhandari’s machinations were all
dumped under the head – “other issues”. There were six notes attached to the
report by different combinations of MPs. The BJP led opposition moaned
and castigated the inaction with regard to “other” issues and the slowness of
CBI. KP Unnikrishnan, thought that several of the comments were far too
harsh and had pinned blame where none was applicable. He argued for
several sensible systemic changes instead of a witch-hunt. CPI MP, Gurudas
Dasgupta, attacked the nexus between industrialists and brokers, named
names and made specific allegations against several bureaucrats and bankers
for having acquired promoters’ quota shares and levelled serious charges
against the then RBI governor S Venkitaramanan and Secretary of Economic
Affairs Montek Singh Ahluwalia.
How were the MPs persuaded to attach notes instead of a formal dissent?
As Gurudas Dasgupta said in his ‘note’, the JPC had arrived at its consensus
on the basis of “minimum agreed points” and “I thought I should go with it
so that a unanimous report, even with its limited and partial findings, can
make the necessary impact in the country.”
Nothing of that sort happened. The JPC report made its mandatory
headlines for a few days and then sank without a trace. All the MPs,
including those from the opposition were probably so weighed down by the
gruelling task of producing the report that they failed to follow up on their
own recommendations and demands. In the end, JPC never tried to
understand the scam and its report appears more a tool to malign individuals
like Manmohan Singh and S Venkitaramanan. Among its dubious
achievements is blindly accepting CBI’s half-truths and not circulating K
Madhavan’s letter explaining why he resigned.
CBI, ED and other agencies
Instead of quickly completing the probe and filing charge-sheets, the
Central Bureau of Investigation , acting as the government’s handmaiden,
was busy spreading stories that CBI joint director
K Madhavan resigned because he could not get a promotion and that
Harshad was financing the narcotics trade. It also repeatedly held back
crucial information from JPC. Madhavan embarrassed CBI and its chief, by
telling the committee that his suggestion to probe the foreign accounts of the

scamsters was disregarded. As if to save face, CBI crudely planted a report
on the night of Sunday, 14 th February 1993 in government-owned news
agencies such as Doordarshan, PTI and UNI. It said: CBI had frozen
Harshad’s Swiss bank accounts. The Indian Express checked with the Swiss
authorities and discovered it to be untrue. CBI made a cruder attempt to
fudge, stating that some accounts were frozen earlier but had since been
released. This too, said The Indian Express , was a lie. Continuing to wield
its main weapon, CBI arrested K Margabanthu former chairman of the
United Commercial Bank and kept him in custody for weeks together.
The Enforcement Directorate had submitted specific infor-mation about
the foreign money received by Harshad Mehta and several others involved in
the scam. For several years the matter lay buried until, all of a sudden, in
July 2000 it came up for hearing at the City Civil Court in Bombay. The
court ordered Harshad Mehta, his brothers Ashwin, Sudhir and Hitesh as
well as two associates Niranjan Shah and Jairaj Java to appear for a day-today trial from 20 th July 2000. Ironically, eight years after the scam, ED was
pleading with the court for additional time because it “planned to file 31
complaints.” Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Usha Iyer rejected
ED’s plea to defer the trial in which the ED had alleged that shares worth Rs
11.1 million were bought by Harshad by using $400,000 which formed part
of the hawala money. These shares were attached.
The Reserve Bank of India could have acted with a greater degree of
authority. After all, it had evidence of fudging books, skimming illegal
profits and concealment of information. For instance, it had found out that
“the entire accounting of the purchase and sale transactions in NHB’s books
was fictitious.” That is a serious charge but there was no follow-up action.
In June 1994, RBI finalised penalties against thirty-five banks for various
violations in the securities scam including PMS schemes and misuse of
ready forward transactions. It slapped a paltry penalty of
Rs 147 crore on twenty banks and asked all thirty-five to maintain an
additional Cash Reserve Ratio of 10% on incremental deposits. Citibank was
made to pay the highest penalty of Rs 50.5 crore, Standard Chartered 34.2
crore, HongKong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Rs 17.9 crore, Bank of
America Rs 11.6 crore and State Bank of India Rs 11.2 crore. Others such as

American Express, ANZ Grindlays, British Bank of Middle East, Deutsche
Bank and Banque Indosuez were fined between Rs 2-3 crore each.
The securities scam trial is an example of how not to deal with financial
scandals and should prove useful as a reference when the trial of Ketan
Parekh comes up. One decision out of twenty-seven cases against Harshad
Mehta is a pathetic record by any standards. Huge amounts of money
remains blocked up, the Custodian has not been able to liquidate shares
seized by the office, despite several bull runs since 1992. Some of those
shares have now turned completely worthless.
One fallout of the scam was that SEBI got statutory recognition. But since
the scam investigation meandered and SEBI never lived up to its role as an
alert watchdog, Harshad could make several attempts to come back. More
interestingly, the ground remained fertile for another bull run and the rise of
a new operator.

Chapter 20
Ketan’s Kamaal
The market learned
‘KP’ was not
interested in doubling
or trebling his money.
He wanted it to go up
10 times in a year.

While the new JPC will surely write reams to justify its
expedition (like another JPC did last time), Scam 2001 was
fairly simple. Money picked up from half-a-dozen companies, a couple of
banks and money procured from private (mainly NRI) sources and put into a
few select, bubble stocks that lost 95% of their value forcing a chain of huge
defaults. There were, of course, smart bear operators and a novel sting
operation by a dotcom company to speed up and colour the climatic
collapse, but the essence of Scam 2001 was all Ketan Parekh and his
massive, uncontrolled over-trading in the equity market. Who is this man,
how large were his exploits and how did he manage to go from anonymity to
stardom to notoriety in just two years?
Parekh, a shy and quiet member of a decades-old traditional broking
company, had been a reasonably big punter for a few years but hardly
anything was known about him. According to a gratuitous piece in Business
Standard in March 2001: “His grandfather Narbheram Harakchand and
father Vinod were highly esteemed guides and mentors to fumbling
newcomers. It was but natural that Parekh follow the path charted out by his
predecessors and try to better their efforts. Following the rule of natural
progression, this young man could too often be seen at Tata Engineering and
Bajaj Auto counters in the trading ring of the BSE, pitting his wits against
the best of those days.”

But his early attempts to play big ended in disasters, mainly due to bad
luck and a choppy market. His acolyte in Business Standard said: “However
success was not always served on a platter. The highs had downfalls too. He
suffered a major debacle in the post-Pokhran scenario. It was dabbling in
Associated Cement Company (ACC) that did it.” In early-1999, after a
couple of big ‘operations’, he finally emerged as a mesmerising messiah for
promoters, institutional investors and retail punters, ramping up a string of
shady companies to stock market stardom.
By the middle of 1999, Ketan had acquired a unique sobriquet that says a
lot about the scope for manipulating the Indian market system: One-man
army. Through the initial bull run of 1999, an awe-struck market heard of
Parekh’s single-handed exploits starting with a pariah software company
called Pentafour Software (now Pentamedia Graphics) and moving on to
Global Telesystems, Aftek Infosys, Himachal Futuristic, Zee Telefilms, etc.
Whispers about his endless sources of committed cash mainly from the loyal
diamond merchant community began circulating. The market learned ‘KP’
was not interested in doubling or trebling his money. He wanted it to go up
ten times in a year. His wealth was whispered to be in thousands of crores.
How did he do it?
Modus operandi
The first step was the same basic trick in any stock operator’s handbook:
picking up substantial stakes from promoters at a large discount to the
market price and put the stock in ‘play’ 14 . The rest of Ketan’s steps,
however, were different. All operators have to neces-sarily think of an exit.
To protect themselves from being saddled with dud stocks if something goes
wrong, they usually have an understanding with the promoters to sell the
stock back to them. Having seen this technique from close quarters, Ketan
knew that this was the Waterloo for many operators. Most Indian promoters
refuse to honour their commitment if things go wrong. Thanks to his long
years in the market after he qualified as a Chartered Accountant, he knew
both the financial and business details of hundreds of companies and what
their owners have been up to in the market. He developed strong likes and
dislikes about promoters and refused to deal with many of them. Unlike
Harshad, who too struck deals with promoters but wanted to build a

constituency among the masses and probably exit when they bought, Ketan
knew his key focus ought to be on institutional investors.
Ketan’s family broking firm, NH Securities, had been an institutional
broker but one factor that could have reinforced his strategy was his
traumatic experience in mid-1998 when in the wake of India’s nuclear tests,
foreign institutional investors went on an indiscriminate selling spree. The
market had gone up steadily since the beginning of the year, encouraging
speculators to build a huge long position just before the Budget scheduled on
1 st June. On 11 th May, India conducted a nuclear test that cut off aid and
scared foreigners. The market revived a bit after that unnerving event but
following Yashwant Sinha’s disastrous Budget, it went on a sharp slide as
the FIIs sold heavily (because they were disillusioned) and UTI sold
desperately (because it was bankrupt and had to pay dividend for June-end).
Many speculators (including Harshad Mehta) lost their shirts.
Through that event, Ketan once again realised how powerful the
institutions were. It is they, who could make or break the market as well as
individual stocks. So, he would identify stocks, take them up to a point and
dump them on to fund managers’ laps. He had to anticipate beforehand
whether he could create enough appetite in a particular stock for fund
managers. Blend these three – choice of promoter, need for an exit (promoter
buyback being a no-no) and focus on fund managers – and you have Ketan’s
game plan. The timing was perfect too.
As the BSE sensitive index spiralled up lazily from 2800 levels as 1998
rolled past, India became a hot destination again. Foreign institutional
investors started pouring money into undervalued Indian companies, most
notably Indian software companies. The index zoomed up from 3600. As the
months went by, the boom seemed more real, as the market shrugged off
both the uncertainty of elections and the Kargil war. Barring minor
corrections, the index went from around 3000 at the beginning of the year to
5000 at the end as the world waited nervously for a Y2K mishap. Then
beginning 2 nd January, the market leapt to 6150 on 14 th February, its final
lunge upwards coming on the back of a global mania over TMT (telecom,
media and technology), including dotcom stocks.

Over that one year, lot of people made loads of money, although very few
retained it. But nobody had a year like Ketan Parekh. Sources close to him
say, he made thousands of crores through deals in at least twenty companies
that ranged from obscure Sony Infosys or Sriven Multitech to high-profile
Satyam Computers, Zee Telefilms and Ranbaxy.
It started with a dud stock like Pentafour, a ‘profit making’ software
company quoted at a P/E of about 2. Ketan picked up the stock, generated
massive liquidity and exited when government-controlled mutual funds and
retail investors got in. Following this, Ketan struck a deal with the late
Parvinder Singh of Ranbaxy. To the amazement of fund managers and
pharma analysts tracking it, Ranbaxy went up steadily on whispers of a
research breakthrough that nobody but Ketan seemed to know about. It could
have attracted charges of insider trading but nobody probed. Ketan’s lock on
Ranbaxy was so strong that later he could get its investment subsidiary,
Vidyut Investments to be a parking lot for some of Parekh’s shares in Global
Trust Bank, later flipped over to Nirma.
This was followed by an endless procession of rigged up stocks, most of
them small software companies that eventually ended up in the portfolio of
mutual funds and retail investors whose market values have dropped by 95%
since. Obscure companies like Aftek normally trade on very thin volumes.
How did Ketan entice big investors to buy them? By generating massive
trading volumes and inter-exchange arbitrage deals. This artificially
generated volume took care of fund managers’ basic criteria of stock
selection – liquidity.
These companies, which were put into play by Parekh also ensured media
attention with a string of announcements such as – large
contracts/assignments, acquisitions, exports, turnover and profits. These
were carefully timed to ensure the maximum price benefit. As prices started
rising rapidly, fund managers were lured in, at successive stages. Many other
punters had travelled the same route in the past, but Ketan stunned everyone
by the audacious size of his operations. He took big stakes in at least ten
major stocks, mostly software companies, eventually called the K-10, 15 and
took the scrips up 10-20 times. He tried to repeat this with media stocks in
late 2000 but the market was collapsing by then. Eventually, Ketan probably
got out of dozens of his shady software stocks but stayed focused on three

‘core’ stocks in which he had built massive positions and where he was
personally very thick with the promoters: Global Telesystems, Himachal
Futuristic Communications Ltd. and Zee Telefilms.
HFCL had converted India’s first attempt at telecom liberalisation into a
joke, by putting in bids worth Rs 85,000 crore for their basic telecom
licenses in a few states under minister Sukh Ram in 1994. Its shares were
languishing at a lowly Rs 40 after ace speculators Harshad Mehta and Ajay
Kayan had made a few abortive attempts to ramp it up. Ketan got into the
stock at the beginning of the 1999 bull run and ramped it up to Rs 2500 in a
little over a year. Somewhere along the way, HFCL made a private
placement, marketed aggressively by India’s most ‘ethical’ broking firm
First Global Securities. Fund managers fought with each other to get a piece
of the action. Australian magnate Kerry Packer apparently bought a 10%
stake that enhanced HFCL’s credibility. A section of the market expressed
private doubts about whether any money actually came in.
Zee was spectacularly rigged up to Rs 1500 (par value of Re 1), when it
was quoting at a P/E of 250 and yet the KP camp followers were spreading
the word that it will hit Rs 10,000. Their slogan was: dus ka ek aur ek ka dus
. That meant that a Rs 10 face value share would be split into 10 of Re 1
each and then each of these Re 1 share would zoom up to Rs 10,000.
Friendly mutual funds like UTI and some FIIs came in at various price levels
to mop up stock or book profits in order to fine-tune the operation. Global
Telesystems, an obscure and shadowy manufacturer of fax machines till
1998 was magically transformed to a new economy company, going up from
Rs 80 in March 1997 to Rs 3550 by March 2000. DSQ Software was taken
from Rs 250 to Rs 2500 in about six months. This is one stock that was
dropped from Ketan’s portfolio because promoter Dinesh Dalmia’s penchant
for large-scale speculation on his own account probably outran Ketan’s
appetite for manipulation 16 . So, Ketan essentially did all that an operator in
India does though on a much larger scale: price rigging, manipulation,
circular trading and dumping stocks into the portfolio of friendly fund
managers.
Along the way, KP also picked up a large stake in a bank because he
probably needed more money for his ramping operations. Offering a

justification on his behalf, the same Business Standard piece said: “As part
of a diversification strategy that every stock market professional has to
adhere to, Parekh made a foray into the banking sector too. The possibility
of banking emerging as an Internet or technology play on the lines of HDFC
Bank and ICICI Bank, was what drew him to Global Trust Bank (GTB). He
now holds a huge stake in GTB, officially four per cent, but rumoured to be
much higher.”
To the adoring crowd of software czars, whose shares were soaring under
the KP magic wand, was later added the film and TV crowd. Suddenly the A
(Amitabh Bachchan Corporation) to Z (Zee Telefilms) of entertainment was
part of the KP circle, including the notorious Tips Industries. One of the key
promoters of Tips had a murder charge against him. The public issue was
lead managed by Parekh’s invest-ment banking outfit – Triumph
International.
Amitabh Bachchan Corporation Ltd. was a disastrous attempt to brand a
superstar and build a thriving company around him;, but the plan had gone
badly awry. When ABCL caught Ketan’s fancy, through the mediation of
MP Amar Singh and others, it was being sued by creditor banks and had
declared itself sick. Ketan coughed up the money to pull ABCL back from
the clutches of the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. At the
time of the 3 rd March crash, there were plans to take ABCL public by
cashing in on Bachchan’s astoundingly reinvigorated stardom as host of a
television game show, Kaun Banega Crorepati .
A grateful ‘Big B’ was soon inaugurating garment shops owned by
Ketan’s relatives. The ambitious juggernaut rolled on. By the end of 1999,
he had invested in half-a-dozen media companies, some of them eager to
jump into the market with dodgy business plans. Over the next one year, he
invested in Tips, Balaji Telefilms, Mukta Arts, UTV, B4U, Mid-day
Multimedia, Minhaz Merchant, HFCL Nine Network and Pritish Nandy
Communications, etc. In March 2000 at the height of Nasdaq and Indian
market boom Ketan Parekh, Vinay Maloo and Australian tycoon Kerry
Packer got together to launch a high-profile venture capital company called
KVP Ventures. Though KVP reportedly stood for Ketan, Vinay and Packer,
market wags claimed that it stood for Ketan V. Parekh and was entirely his

show. Though his influence over the market rivalled that of the one-time Big
Bull Harshad Mehta, Parekh had remained resolutely low profile. Very little
was known about him. After the market crashed in March 2001, the fawning
Business Standard article would enlighten us: “Despite his penchant for
making money, Parekh is extremely religious. His is a familiar face at the St.
Michael’s Church at Mahim every Wednesday. Frequent pilgrimages with
friends is a routine he finds time for. Yet, every man has his fancies. Parekh
too has his. Las Vegas is the place he loves to holiday in. The love of the
roulette holds him enthralled there. Here the killer instinct takes over no
matter what price he has to pay.”
That gives us a clue but the fact is, unlike the ebullience and charm of
Harshad Mehta with whom he is inevitably compared, Ketan Parekh was
quiet and serious. There were other differences too – no flashy cars, media
hype or flamboyant parties. It was as though Ketan, who was the youngest of
Harshad’s associates in 1992, had learnt a lot from Harshad’s meteoric rise
and fall. After all, one of his closest advisors was Ashwin Mehta, Harshad’s
low-profile brother.
All that changed in January 2000. It was around the time that Ketan threw
his famous Millennium bash in Bombay to announce that he has ‘arrived’.
The guests, comprising the new software czars, media barons and bigwigs
from the financial world assembled for a champagne reception at the Taj
Mahal hotel’s Sea Lounge restaurant. They were then ferried in high-security
catamarans across the sea, to Parekh’s seaside bungalow at Mandwa – a
short ride off the South Bombay coast.
Suddenly, the reclusive Parekh was going the Harshad way with
vengeance. He started making media headlines with regularity, sometimes in
tow with an odd mix of personalities like Australian magnate Kerry Packer,
politician Amar Singh or Vinay Maloo of Himachal Futuristic. His other
friends were Manoj Tirodkar of Global Telesystems and Subhash Chandra of
Zee. Rumour has it that Tirodkar presented him with a top of the line Lexus
(it was Lexus too that had made Harshad famous). Not to be outdone, Maloo
of HFCL apparently gave him an extravagant Cadillac, custom-fitted with
multiple tele-visions and assorted gizmos. Also, like Harshad, who wanted
to buy up all the offices at Maker V in Bombay’s business district of
Nariman Point, Ketan agreed to pay a hefty premium over the market price

to purchase one of ICICI’s buildings for Rs 75 crore. The deal fell through
when Ketan went bust.
Ketan’s alleged connections across various political parties made him
appear untouchable. An Income Tax raid in early 2000 was suddenly
converted into a search, but the market remained nervous. Many compared
Ketan’s coming out bash with a similarly lavish party by the bull operators
on 9 th April 1992 just before the securities scam revelations ended
Harshad’s famous bull run.
If he was convinced that he could replicate his success in software with
the entertainment stocks, he certainly lived his belief. Ketan, coming from a
traditional broking firm and Jain family, would spend far too much time
partying and making merry with film industry bigwigs, stars and starlets. It
was this, say his industrialist friends, which finally did him in. “He would be
out partying until 3.30 p.m; he simply lost his grip and unaware of the
market forces shaping up to destroy him”, says a friend whose shares he
helped ramp up to dizzy heights.
One estimate of his wealth when the market was at its peak, was Rs 3000
crore. Strange, he would finally still need a bank and hundreds of crores
from corporate houses to keep him afloat. Blindsided by the meltdown in
TMT stocks, overconfidence in his abilities and dazzled by the entertainment
world, over the next one year Ketan would break all his cardinal do’s and
don’ts that had made him such a successful operator. He unmade himself as
fast as he made it.
What went wrong?
The domestic market and Nasdaq began to run out of steam in March
2000 and then went on a long slide. By mid-2000 the IT mania began to run
out as sanity returned around the world. According to sources, Ketan had no
illusions about the fact that most of his stocks were overvalued. For instance,
at a price of Rs 1500 and a P/E multiple of 350, Zee was not exactly cheap.
In fact, as early as the Diwali of 1999 he had completed many of his
‘operations’ (picked up large stakes at a low price, traded vigorously and
placed them with funds) and did not find anything undervalued. People who

knew him said that he was a savvy market operator who booked profits
regularly and slipped in and out of his large position.
But strangely, Ketan seemed to have fallen in love with a few companies –
a cardinal sin in the stock market: Zee, HFCL, Global Tele and maybe
Satyam. When the Nasdaq and Indian markets started tanking through the
second half of 2000, Ketan was stuck with massive holdings in these scrips.
At one time, his position in HFCL was almost 60% of the total carry forward
position in BSE. His trading and investments were spread over a dozen
companies but mainly in Panther Fincap, Triumph International and Classic
Credit. But many of his bets were played out in the grey market of Kolkata,
the den of unbridled off-market speculation. As these shares fell from their
lofty perch, Ketan supported them with bouts of buying and selling. Why
didn’t he get out of these losing positions? Two reasons. One, he was no
longer a trader. He was an insider with these companies, forming deep
personal-bonds with the dominant owners Vinay Maloo (HFCL), Manoj
Tirodkar (Global Tele) and Subhash Chandra. Two, his own logic was
simple: If I am holding so much of stock of each of these companies, where
would the selling come from?
In December, after several rounds of battering that the TMT stocks
suffered, his grip began to weaken. Fund managers sitting on large losses
and punters holding losing positions, were looking forward to the January
effect – FIIs pour money into Indian equities after fresh asset allocations in
the beginning of the year. Indeed there was a spurt in January, some backing
and filling and then a sharp speculative rise up to 15 th February, two weeks
before the Budget. As the index pierced the falling trendline from February
2000, there was a buzz that the market would move to a new orbit. However,
ominously, the software stocks were not participating in this rally. This was
the beginning of the end of Ketan Parekh. A calculated assault by a bear
cartel and some institutional selling created a powerful downdraft in K-10
stocks.
The bear cartel included a couple of the savviest old players in Dalal
Street like Radhakishan Damani. Soft-spoken and extremely sharp, Damani
has made more smart bets than anybody has for years. Adept at both
sentiment-driven trading and research-driven investment, he is easily the
wealthiest investor in India, with large stakes in multinationals. He had been

out of the market for over a year during the maniacal bull-run. Aghast and
intrigued that puffed up stocks like HFCL and Global Tele could be taken to
four digits in a year, bears like Damani have been biding their time to make
money by short-selling. They started building a short position since early
2001.
Sensing continuing weakness for TMT stock all over the world and seeing
no immediate catalyst for the broader market, the cartel moved in for the kill
in January and February. Institutional investors, till then the mainstay of
Ketan, were exhausted too. They were nursing large losses and need only a
gentle persuasion to start selling in a global environment of gloom. That was
converted into a landslide, climaxing in a panic sell off after the Budget had
created a mood of optimism.
On 28 th February, Sinha unveiled what was dubbed an outstanding
Budget. Even as his Budget speech was being broadcast on television
networks the Sensex soared to 4247, a record gain of 177 points. The next
day, the market remained surprisingly volatile, (movement of over 160
points) and inched up with a gain of twenty-five points. Even then, there
were whispers about a serious payment crisis, but nobody knew if the postBudget rally would allow Ketan and his band of brokers to tide over their
losses. It did not happen. Ominously, the software stocks were trashed.
Infosys Technologies having closed at Rs.6258.40 on the 28 th of February
fell 9% the next day to close at Rs.5682.70 similarly Satyam fell almost 10%
from Rs.347.00 on 28 th February to Rs.312.65 on 1 st March. HCL
Technologies and NIIT met the same fate – falling 7% and 6% from
Rs.622.65 and Rs.1242.60 on the 28 th February to Rs.577.15 and
Rs.1169.95 on 1 st March, respectively.
Even as The Economic Times was getting Ketan to dispense wisdom on
the Budget, it became clear that the crisis was unavoidable. The next day
broke his back and his cabal of operators. Shedding the entire post-Budget
gains, Sensex went down by stupendous 176 points, on massive bear
hammering. For the week ended 2 nd March 2001, the value of short-sold
stocks went up by a huge Rs 64 crore.

Jerked out of its sleep and prodded by the ministry of finance, SEBI
pounced on the bear operators and launched an inquiry into their trades. It
banned short sales and increased margins, encouraged the broker directors
from the Bombay and Calcutta Stock Exchanges to resign. Three settlements
of the Calcutta bourse were completed under highly dubious circumstances.
The bears were probably working on inside information about Parekh’s
extremely weakened position by then.
The then president of BSE Anand Rathi was suspected to be one of them.
Rathi had asked the BSE’s surveillance department for information on the
trading positions of various players and details of the big operators on the
Black Friday of 2 nd March. On 5 th March, SEBI got hold of the audio-tapes
that indeed seemed to indict Rathi. He resigned on 8 th March. By then
Ketan’s problems were full-blown. There was payment crisis in Calcutta
Stock Exchange and fears of default on BSE too. He did try to make valiant
attempts to hold up his stocks, inspired by a temporary rise in Nasdaq on
March 6 th but the avalanche of selling by retail investors was too much to
handle. Ketan’s game was over.
The opposition parties in Parliament were demanding an expla-nation
from government and Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha had to agree to a
detailed debate in the Rajya Sabha on 13 th March. Even as the debate was
raging, on 13 th March, the bears fired another salvo. Tehelka . com , funded
by First Global Group, exposed a defence bribery scandal through a sting
operation, filmed on videotape. Curiously, Zee News, never known for doing
investigative stories, took extraordinary interest in the Tehelka tapes, rerunning them for hours and days together. Infosys having closed the day
before at Rs.4452.40 came down to Rs.4283.10 on the 13 th March.
Similarly, Satyam fell to Rs.203.55 having closed the previous day at
Rs.212.80. Himachal and Global reeled under the pressure closing at
Rs.230.75 and Rs.159.30 having closed the previous day at Rs.274.65 and
Rs.189.60, respectively.
From January till a few days after March, Ketan continued his rescue
operation for his beloved Global Tele, HFCL and Zee. For some strange
reason, KP, the savviest of market players, was repeating the cardinal
mistake that has killed many operators before him: fight the market. In

desperation, he turned to two main sources: banks and his favourite
promoters. He was funded by an obscure co-operative bank from Gujarat
called Madhavpura Cooperative Bank and the highly visible new bank called
Global Trust Bank. By early March ’01 when he was neck-deep in losses, he
had access to a phenomenal Rs 2000 crore from these two banks and his
favourite promoters.
Global Trust Bank, which he had bought into as a “diversification strategy
that every stock market professional has to adhere to” (according to the
Business Standard profile), had already emerged as the key to Ketan’s
operations from late 1999. He ramped up its price, took a large stake in it
and used the bank to fund himself and his associates. GTB’s exposure to the
various known entities of Ketan Parekh was over Rs 250 crore. Interestingly,
GTB chairman Ramesh Gelli has been on record to say that under the RBI
norms his lending to Parekh cannot exceed Rs 100 crore.
At least a dozen KP companies/associates figured among the top 100
borrowers of GTB; apart from these, almost all his companies used for
trading had accounts with GTB. Most of the K-10 companies and their many
shell/investment companies also had accounts with the bank. Most of these
entities had depository accounts with GTB too. Eventually, GTB provided
for Rs 70 crore of losses on the Scam 2001 and changed the top
management. Ramesh Gelli, chairman and the key promoter quit under a
cloud, blaming the media. But Ketan’s real quarry was Madhavpura Bank.
Madhavpura would issue pay orders to three finance companies owned by
Ketan, Classic Share & Stock Broking Services Ltd., Panther Fincap
Management Services Ltd., and Panther Investrade and Management
Services Ltd., which had accounts in BOI. BOI discounted these pay orders
for a hefty fee and credited them. Ketan had a line of credit of Rs 200 crore
from Madhavpura Co-operative Bank against which he had pledged
securities worth Rs 300 crore plus – mainly the K-10 bubble stocks.
On 8 th and 9 th March, BOI discounted pay orders of Madhavpura Bank
for Rs 65 crore presented by Classic Share & Stockbrokers,
Rs 20 crore presented by Panther Investrade and Rs 52 crore on account of
Panther Fincap. That added up to Rs 137 crore in all. In the normal course,
the pay orders would have been cleared on the following two days. March 10

th

and 11 th were holidays. On 12 th March at 11 p.m. RBI discovered the
true state of the bank and declared Madhavpura a defaulter and asked pay
orders of Rs 75 crore (not Rs 137 crore) to be returned unpaid on 13 th
March. By then, BOI had already credited the amount on the assumption that
pay orders had been credited. Shockingly, RBI ordered two pay orders of Rs
62 crore to be returned as late as 20 th March.
However, when Madhavpura Bank was declared a defaulter on 12 th
March, it refused to honour pay orders of Rs 137 crore, which were already
discounted by BOI. BOI turned on the heat and summoned Ketan for several
meetings, demanded that he make good the loss. Ketan pleaded that he
cannot because of the ongoing Income Tax raids. However, he brought in Rs
7 crore and the liability was down to Rs 130 crore.
The bank began to follow the money. It had gone into Nakshatra Software
Pvt. Ltd., Chitrakoot Computers Pvt. Ltd. and Goldfish Computers Pvt. Ltd.
The money transferred to these companies was large enough to arouse
suspicion. Classic Share & Stock Broking moved Rs 249 crore to Chitrakoot
computers, Panther Fincap trans-ferred Rs 160 crore to Goldfish Computers
and Panther Investrade shifted Rs 260 crore to Nakshatra Computers. These
were obviously part of a complicated web of shell companies, bank accounts
and brokers, which allowed KP to suck out large chunks of money from the
banking system and hold up the price of his favourite scrips.
Eventually, SEBI found out that Ketan borrowed Rs 798 crore from the
bank through eleven of his firms such as Saimangal, Nakshatra, Goldfish,
Chitrakoot and Luminent Investments, etc. Other than these, two brokerage
firms Mukesh Babu Securities and Suresh Maniar were also lent Rs 200
crore and Rs 50 crore each, for transactions done on behalf of Ketan. As per
RBI’s regulations, Madhavpura was not supposed to lend over Rs 15 crore.
As against this, it admitted to a Rs 200 crore exposure, which is really just a
quarter of its real lending to the broker.
Faced with Rs 130 crore default, BOI asked Ketan to transfer the title to
the stocks pledged with Madhavpura but he was reluctant, claiming to be
able to arrange for a separate collateral. Probably, Ketan was simply rotating
funds between BoI and Madhavpura for several months based on the shares

pledged, without additional investment. Through a combination of over-draft
facilities from Madhavpura Bank and the pay order discounting facility from
BOI, Ketan may have been able to buy an entire week of funding to finance
BSE settlements, merely by paying the cost of these facilities.
As he was struggling to juggle his huge positions, along with
Madhavpura, Ketan was very generously funded by the companies he had
ramped up. On 8 th and 9 th March, Zee Telefilms and its affiliate Siticable
routed Rs 225 crore into a company called Digital Superhighway and Briggs
Trading Pvt. Ltd., two investment companies of the Subhash Chandracontrolled Essel. This was flipped over the same day to Parekh’s firm
Classic Credit. All these entities had accounts in Global Trust Bank.
Zee Telefilms began to fund Ketan Parekh around January this year. In
two transactions – one in January (Rs 90 crore) and another on 9 th March
(Rs 50 crore), it transferred another Rs 140 crore to Ketan’s companies –
Panther Fincap and Panther Investrade through three other finance
companies – Ganjum Investments, Churu Investments and Prajatma
Investments. On 8 th and 9 th March, HFCL transferred Rs 150 crore to
Digital Superhighway and from there on to Ketan’s Panther Fincap. Clearly,
Ketan, Vinay Maloo and Subhash Chandra were so thick with each other that
HFCL had no qualms about routing money to Ketan through a Zee Group
investment company. Further, between 28 th February and 8 th March in a
series of separate transactions HFCL routed another Rs 154 crore to Parekh’s
Panther Fincap and Classic Credit, through yet another investment company
called Burlington Fincap Pvt. Ltd.
Thus, from Zee and HFCL alone, Ketan Parekh got Rs 669 crore to pay
brokers who operated for him. About Rs 250 crore went to a single Calcutta
broker called Sanjay Khemani. HFCL’s generosity to Ketan Parekh included
funds raised through the non-convertible debentures issue, subscribed to by
UTI and a loan of Rs 150 crore from ICICI. Zee too is understood to have
received institutional funding in the same period, which was routed to
Parekh. Other beholden promoters whose stocks he had rigged, also chipped
in for the ‘Save Ketan’ operation. Kopran borrowed from UTI and directly
lent Rs 78 crore to Classic Credit brokers in the first week of March.

None of this, however, was enough to save Ketan. Short of Rs 130 crore
in pay orders, BOI filed complaints with the Central Bureau of Investigation
and the Income Tax department against Ketan Parekh. The Sensex crashed
by 147 points as Ketan was interrogated, arrested and detained for the next
fifty-two days.
Once the JPC investigation started, people close to Ketan Parekh launched
a scurrilous personal attack against us, using a couple of friendly
newspapers. The attack included allegations that we were close to bear
operators. (Ironically, a big bear operator in SEBI’s eyes, First Global’s
Shankar Sharma himself has been sending us abusive emails and has filed a
defamation suit against Sucheta!). When Ketan was released from CBI
custody on 21 st May, he had a peculiar argument to peddle – to the same
journalist in Business Standard . He admitted that he “got carried away” and
that he had “no one else to blame my own judgement.” Nevertheless he was
“contemplating filing a Rs 5000 crore defamation case against BOI.”
Enthusiastically prodded by the paper, he also came up with the novel idea
that the entire issue was blown out of proportion and there was no
criminality involved. What did the future look like, asked the paper. The Big
Bull’s startling response: “One thing is certain. There is no sense in trying to
be a bull. It’s foolish to be bullish, if I may say so.” Some anti-climax.

Chapter 21
Play It Again Sam
Exactly nine years
after Harshad
Mehta’s over-trading
split apart the creaky
Indian equities and
debt market, the
Indian stock market
and its mammoth,
nation-wide trading
system was brought to
the brink of disaster
in March-April 2001.

Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha, announces a great Union
Budget but the stock market collapses. The biggest market
operator goes bust and is put behind bars by the CBI for questioning. There
is a run on a co-operative bank. Some junk stocks that had run up 10-15
times crash to 5%-10% of their peak value. Many brokers go bust.
Preliminary investigations unravel a scheme of parking stocks and price
rigging in a nexus between banks, brokers, stock operators, mutual funds and
companies. The broker-members of the BSE governing board, including the
president are deeply mired in controversy. The regulators, RBI and SEBI are
found sleeping. A JPC is appointed to probe all this.
No, we are not talking of Scam 1992. We are talking of Scam 2001. And
just as a high-profile Delhi-based newspaper owner had said in 1992 that the
scam was a figment of journalists’ imagination, a few “intellectuals”, tried to
suggest that there was no scam in 2001, no wrongdoing at all.

However, in a remarkable repetition of history, exactly nine years after
Harshad Mehta’s over-trading split apart the creaky Indian equities and debt
market, the Indian stock market and its mammoth, nation-wide trading
system was brought to the brink of disaster in March-April 2001. At the
centre was Ketan Parekh, a quiet, one-time buddy of the voluble Harshad.
Sure, there are big differences between the two. As opposed to the first
revelation of Harshad Mehta helping himself to Rs 500 crore (later turned
out to be Rs 660 crore) from SBI, Ketan Parekh’s default was Rs 130 crore.
Unlike banks and PSUs, a lot of money this time openly came from the
private corporate sector. Also, the 1992 scandal enveloped National Housing
Bank, Citi Bank, ANZ Grindlays, Standard Chartered and two smaller
banks. This time it is only three banks. Still, there are startling similarities.
Harshad/Ketan : In this age of sequels it should not be surprising that
Ketan Parekh closely followed the footsteps of Harshad Mehta. He lacked
Mehta’s flamboyance and charisma or the ability to rationalise his price
rigging with theories such as “replacement cost”, but he was supposed to be
more sure-footed and his clout was far more widespread. Ironically enough,
Harshad’s brother Ashwin Mehta has been Ketan’s close advisor, and both
the Bulls operated through a close group of relatives and friends. Like the
Harshad-Ashwin duo, Ketan’s business operations were aided by his cousin
Kartik. One interesting similarity: Ketan was an accused in one of 1992
scam cases too. (Canbank Mutual Fund Case-3 of 1996).
SBI/ BOI: SBI’s discovery of a Rs 660 crore black hole in its books led to
the unravelling of the 1992 scam. Nine years later, it was the Rs 130 crore
hole at Bank of India, which led the trail to Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative Bank and to Ketan Parekh and thousands of crores of market
losses.
UTI: Mutual funds played the exact role that several other Indian banks
played in the 1992 scandal. Many funds had portfolios stuffed with K-10
scrips. At the centre of allegations about the Ketan-MF nexus was UTI. In
1992, three JPC members, George Fernandes, Rabi Ray and Jaipal Reddy
had pointed out how UTI was “used by the unscrupulous among industrial
houses for their manipulative games and for many other illegitimate

deals…”, and had called for a full investigation. Nine years later, UTI’s
flagship scheme US-64 remains outside the supervisory purview of SEBI.
BJP MP Kirit Somiaya has been alleging this repeatedly but the JPC is slow
to probe. UTI’s investment in Ketan’s favourite bubble stocks like DSQ
Software, Global Telesystems, Zee Telefims and HFCL, its sudden
subscription to Rs 50 crore worth of debentures of HFCL all aided Ketan
Parkeh and his gang of promoters. Also, as SEBI’s preliminary inspection
report said that UTI had provided a “benchmarking” of prices to the
speculators. UTI involvement went so deep that eventually US-64 had to
annouce suspension of sale and repurchase of units for six months. UTI
chief, PS Subramanyam had to resign.
Hiten Dalal/Nirmal Bang: In place of the shadowy, little-known and
reticent Hiten Dalal, we now have the low-profile Nirmal Bang who ran
massive transactions through five cards and affiliate companies. This gave
him hefty exposure limits, which were used by speculators and big
operators. Like Hiten, Bang did not move stocks, but was indispensable to
anyone who did. His clients ranged from articulate, abrasive and arrogant
Shankar Sharma of First Global Securities to quiet operator Nemish Shah
and innumerable day traders across the country.
These players kept their own books spotless and routed most of their
speculative operations through Nirmal Bang and his companies. For
instance, First Global paid Rs one crore to Bang’s companies in brokerage
alone last year. This translated to a trading turnover of about Rs 1000 crore.
Like Hiten Dalal, Nirmal Bang preferred to keep an extremely low profile.
He is never quoted in the press and is never photographed.
Fairgrowth/GTB: Global Trust Bank was a fast-growing bank as
opposed to Fairgrowth which was a financial services company. But both
were headed by go getting, razor sharp bankers, professionals-turnedentrepreneurs. They both had a tragic flaw – for both the end justified the
means. The dynamic former chairman of Canara Bank, superbanker late B
Ratnakar, took Fairgrowth on a path of scorching growth. GTB’s chairman
Ramesh Gelli, like Ratnakar, powered his way up the banking system to
become the first entrepreneur-banker. A small difference was that Ratnakar
was credited with foisting a host of “cowboy bankers”, as someone famously
called them, on to the banking system, many of who ended up as key players

in the 1992 scam. Ramesh Gelli, on the other hand, was the only star in his
team.
Banks/Brokers, FIIs: Citibank, Stanchart, ANZ Grindlays were the key
players of 1992 against whom JPC had demanded stringent penalties
including suspension of licenses. This time, among the key players were
foreign broking outfits and FIIs involved in price rigging and were conduits
for unaccounted Indian money flowing in and out of the stock market.
Besides, Citi has left a rich legacy. Under scrutiny in 2001 are Credit Suisse
First Boston headed by a former Citibanker and First Global, owned by
former Citibankers. SEBI investigations unearthed five overseas corporate
bodies registered with CSFB, which were operating mainly for Ketan
Parekh. They have apparently transferred a whopping Rs 2900 crore abroad
in the fifteen months until March 2001.
FIIs will provide the missing link between brokers and businessmen
whose stocks were ramped up. They have been known to offer the safety of
their anonymous sub-account for stock operations by Indian industrialists.
Some have even offered a package deal, which included the setting up of
overseas accounts and companies and several trading options. So far,
however, SEBI has refused to probe the issue of Participatory Notes (an
omnibus financial instrument representing specific underlying securities
purchased in the Indian market) abroad and their links to Ketan Parekh’s
operations.
Co-operative Banks: The shenanigans of Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative Bank and other tiny banks make for obvious parallels with the
Metropolitan Co-operative Bank and Bank of Karad of 1992. Incidentally,
even after commenting on the role of co-operative banks and small private
banks in 1992, JPC had made no recommendations about tightening
supervisory control over these banks. RBI’s supervision continues to be
slack. The difference is that this time Madhavpura is being bailed out as part
of a self-serving political decision pushed by LK Advani, who is the MP
from Ahmedabad.
Poor Systems: The scam of 1992 happened because of poor systems. It
was the same in 2001. While the market system underwent far-reaching

changes after 1992, it failed to move into the next phase of reforms that
should have included rolling settlements, uniform settlement dates across
twenty-three stock exchanges (to reduce reckless arbitrage) and a reduction
in the number of bourses through mergers or closure. The supervisory
structure was weak too. As it happened, these systemic loopholes allowed
brokers to create a trading bubble with a finite amount of money by rolling
trading positions from one stock exchange to another. In 1992, BSE with a
daily turnover of Rs 300 crore or so accounted for two-third of national
trading and NSE did not exist. At its peak in 2000, BSE and NSE together
logged volumes of Rs 12,000 crore a day. The powerful broker lobby
scuttled various attempts to introduce reforms with the argument that these
huge trading volumes would vanish. It was these massive trading positions
moving unchecked from one exchange to another that fuelled the scam of
2001.
RBI/SEBI: The JPC of 1992 specifically held RBI responsible for
ignoring warning signals since 1986. It said: “red alerts were ignored,
reports consigned to the back-burner and market intelligence treated with
disdain.” This statement could well be cut and pasted in the JPC report on
Scam-2001. The deputy governor named in the last JPC report and other
officials were not touched. The department of supervision, initially
envisaged as a powerful and independent supervisory agency dwindled into
just another sleepy RBI department. It was headed by a deputy governor,
who was on his second extension, and unknown for initiating any stringent
supervisory action. Scam 2001 was brought about by SEBI’s inability to
check the utter lawlessness of the Calcutta Stock Exchange or the brazen
price ramping by Bombay-based operators.
JPC II: There is a sense of déjà vu in another JPC probe. The previous
JPC’s composition and its meandering investigation achieved almost nothing
and had dwindled into horse trading to decide who would be indicted and
who should be let off. Several of its main recommendations were diluted
until they were ineffectual. Serious charges of bribe taking against Prime
Minister Narasimha Rao and his sons’ involvement in the Goldstar-Andhra
Bank scandal were relegated to the many notes attached to the main report.
The role of industrialists also appeared only in the notes and was promptly

ignored. After all politicians understand better than anyone else the role of
industry in greasing the wheels of government.
Corporate Nexus: In the 1992 scam, some businessmen were closely
associated in price ramping with Harshad Mehta. As JPC said, it came across
“various instances of close nexus between prominent industrial houses,
banks and brokers.” Last time names like Reliance Industries, Apollo Tyres
and United Breweries cropped up. Nothing happened to them. In 1998, BPL,
Videocon and Sterlite Industries were found to have colluded with Harshad
in ramping up their share prices. But again nothing happened to these
promoters (until mid-2001). Probably, emboldened by the regulators’ lack of
action, Ketan Parekh and companies like Zee, HFCL, Global Tele and others
embarked on the most brazen saga of price rigging and price support. Ketan
was also funded by Ranbaxy, Kopran and Nirma. The various dimensions of
this nexus are still being unearthed. One of the companies, DSQ Software, is
a bizarre case, ripe for all sorts of probe. We have described it later.
Meanwhile, here is a snapshot of the key players in Scam 2001.
Credit Suisse First Boston
In Scam 1992, the foreign banks played a major role. In 2001, it was the
turn of FIIs, allowing the use of their sub-accounts and foreign broking firms
(claiming higher ethical standards and better code of conduct than their
Indian counterparts). For years, it has been whispered that the sub-accounts
of FIIs were conduits for Indian money (that had gone out) coming back into
Indian markets through Participatory Notes and Overseas Corporate Bodies.
At various times, Enforcement Directorate and Income Tax department
wanted to investigate it, but the ministry of finance stopped it. Now SEBI
offers proof if JPC wants to investigate.
SEBI suspended Credit Suisse First Boston (I) Securities Pvt. Ltd. in April
2001, after discovering that it has repatriated a phenomenal Rs 2900 crore
between March 1999 to March 2001 through five Mauritius-registered OCBs
operating for Ketan Parekh: Brentfield Holding Ltd., Kensington
Investments Ltd. and Wakefield Holdings, European Investment and Far
East Investment. The last two had an issued and paid up capital of just $10.
The first three were given introductions to bank accounts by Triumph
International, a Ketan Parekh company.

Large chunks of Ketan’s sales were through CSFB and curiously enough,
CSFB was willing to credit the money for these sales on the payment date
itself without waiting for the official stock exchange pay-out. One example:
for a sale of three lakh shares of Adani Exports, Rs 25 crore payment was
made on the date of sale even though the shares were credited the next day.
This led to another discovery. All these deals were inexplicably charged
differential brokerage rates. It is only when SEBI correlated the brokerage
paid with the time period between payment to the client and the receipt of
funds from pay-out, that it became evident that this included a financing
charge. SEBI has provided several examples where Ketan Parekh obtained
funds for 7-14 days from CSFB and paid interest in the guise of differential
brokerage.
Next, SEBI matched these sell orders, which were apparently funding
transactions with the buy orders on BSE. It was in for another surprise. It
found that on the other side were brokers operating for Ketan like Triumph
International, Milan Mahendra, Hem Securities, Omega Equity, CJ Dalal,
Indsec Securities, Visaria Securities and Vyomit Shares. So, the suspicion is
that Ketan was selling from an FII sub-account through CSFB and buying as
an Indian investor. If this is true, the implication is that money has gone out
of India in the garb of FII sales and shares have been delivered here.
One interesting sidelight of this operation is how such huge volumes were
transacted using the automated system without disturbing the price. Brokers
call this the ‘1,2,3 system’ of manipulating the automated order-matched
system. Identical buy and sell orders in terms of scrip, price and quantity for
such collusive transactions were first keyed into respective computers. After
this, the dealers got on to the telephone and hit the buy/sell button on the
count of three, synchronising their trades to a few seconds. (So much for the
huge volumes before badla was banned!) SEBI unearthed such deals in
Adani Exports and Shonkh Technologies at BSE and in Global Trust Bank
and Zee Telefilms on NSE with volumes ranging from 1.6 lakh shares to 14
lakh shares. The cumulative value of such funding deals on the BSE and
NSE aggregated to Rs 1813 crore in the January-March 2001 period alone,
according to SEBI investigation. While payment was released through
CSFB’s own funds, delivery of shares and repayment were ensured through
the settlement mechanism of stock exchanges.

CSFB claimed that these were normal transactions and that it had insured
its risk by demanding immediate delivery. However, it could not explain
how the differential brokerage rates tallied with funding charges on
obviously synchronised deals. Why were the OCBs selling K-10 shares and
Ketan’s brokers buying them? CSFB made the astonishing claim that Ketan
Parekh had been asked to find a buyer against his sales because his trades
were so large. SEBI called the explanation unconvincing and said that it only
seemed to substantiate the charge of collusion with CSFB. The transactions
were structured in such a manner that Ketan Parekh, suspected SEBI,
received short-term funds while the Settlement Guarantee Fund of stock
exchanges secured the payment to CSFB in case Parekh defaulted. Hence,
the subterfuge of synchronised trades.
SEBI found more damning evidence of CSFB’s role. It did large
proprietary trading on its own account and for Kallar Kahar, a Mauritiusincorporated company owned by it and registered as a sub-account. Kallar
Kahar had only a two-dollar share capital at the time of registration, which
was later increased to $100. As on 12 th April 2001, most of its capital was
in the form of US $ 267 million participating redeemable preference shares.
Who were the subscribers? Will JPC ask CSFB?
Interestingly, a large chunk of Kallar Kahar’s transactions were only in
Ketan Parekh’s scrips, and the pattern of trading included the use of
Participatory Notes in order to hide the identity of the purchasers. SEBI’s
preliminary findings do not rule out front-running by CSFB also on their
own account and in the Kallar Kahar account.
CSFB had similar dealings with Calcutta broker Ajay Kayan who was
investigated and accused in the securities scam of 1992 and was extremely
close to Citibank. Incidentally, CSFB’s India chief KR Bharat is an exCitibank employee and was one of the seven people who were asked to leave
the bank during the scam investigations.
Sachin Tendulkar of the market
Every scam throws up a few extremely colourful characters. While Ketan
Parekh was the icon of Scam 2001, the most colourful was certainly Shankar
Sharma, who along with his wife Devina Mehra own one of the fastest-

growing and savviest brokerage firms in India, First Global. A sharp and
articulate couple, Shankar and Devina alternately wrote a weekly column in
Business World , which was all about ethics, transparency, accountability
and governance. The firm, known for its contrarian views and highly
irreverent style, unabashedly called itself the “Sachin Tendulkar of the
securities industry” in its representation to SEBI. Its self-image (as
appearing on its website) is: “frankly, we never have, and never will,
benchmark ourselves against competition, because there isn’t any.” That
sounds less like Tendulkar and more like Mohammed Ali.
Indeed, theirs seemed an amazing success story, based on guts,
entrepreneurship, vision, research and hard work. Sharma is an MBA from
the Asian Institute of Finance, Manila, who worked in Citibank until he
chucked his staid investment banking job after 1990 to become a
stockbroker. He started as a sub-broker and slowly worked at acquir-ing his
own broking membership. About Devina Mehra, First Global’s website says
(she holds) “seven gold medals from Lucknow University in Mathematics,
Statistics and English Literature (holder of a 60-year record) – and then, it
gets even better – gold medallist from IIM-Ahmedabad, Class of ’86!” She
met and married Shankar at Citibank and joined the hurly-burly world of
stock broking.
Their background already made them unusual, but they quickly attracted
attention with hard-hitting, sarcastic, irreverent and often funny research
reports and commentaries. They claimed their business was underpinned by
high-quality research and fundamental values. In the next five years, they
notched up an unbelievable growth record, without being too dependent on
domestic institutions for business. As they claim on their website: “On a
‘Buy’ recommendation from First Global, millions of dollars of foreign
money moves into stocks. For example, our ‘Buy’ on Telco (at Rs.150-160)
saw something like $60 mn of buy orders flooding in through us – we
bought about 4-5% of Telco! And our ‘Buy’ on Himachal Futuristic saw
purchases of something like 12.5 mn shares – around 20% of the company –
by Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs). We have almost entirely, bought
Vikas WSP’s 28% FII holding. That’s the awesome power of First Global’s
research – no other firm in the business rivals it, Indian or foreign.”

By 2001, First Global was among the top five stock broking firms, by far
the favourite broker of many FIIs. They had opened offices at London and
Dubai, obtained deemed FII status themselves (later scrapped by SEBI) and
were in line to get trading membership at the New York Stock Exchange.
Their research now also focused on the world economy.
Their alert minds were also playing godfather to start-ups. They had
invested in car designer Dilip Chhabria’s company (DC Motors), hoping for
a splashy listing, claiming that it would be “better than Infosys”. Another
innocuous investment of theirs, however, made a different kind of splash.
They acquired a 5% stake in Tehelka.com , the website that shook up the
Indian political establishment by exposing on video tape, corruption in
defence deals. The stake was later hiked to 15% and Sharma was working at
organising the second round of funding for Tehelka .
By 2001, they were making stupendous amounts of money (apparently
paid taxes of Rs 50 crore). Of course, not all of it was through staid
brokerage obtained by offering the best research. By 1998, they were
showing signs of frustration that most of their (right) calls were sells,
whereas clients were always looking for what to buy. Maybe that realisation
was the turning point for this smart couple. The next year they came out with
a string of buy recommendations that outdid even the most mindlessly
bullish analysts.
It certainly fetched them megabucks, but a large part of it was earned
exactly the way the rest of the financial world does: placement of equity at
rigged up prices. Using their goodwill, they did a blitzkrieg private
placement of 10% of the equity of HFCL, a highly controversial company
run by Vinay Maloo and Mahendra Nahata, raising Rs 735 crore at Rs 1050
a share.
HFCL’s chairman Vinay Maloo, of course, was a close friend and
associate of Ketan Parekh, so close that HFCL shareholders’ money was put
at Ketan’s disposal to help him meet his speculative losses. Shankar and
Devina believed that the placement was all their effort, although Ketan
possibly had a considerable role to play in “influencing” fund managers. On
its part, First Global put out a sketchy and unconvincing research report,
which started out admitting that HFCL was a high-risk scrip. It had fallen

85% in 1996 and had already soared 2000% in 2000 (thanks to Ketan’s
kamaal ) when they were flogging it. It touched a dizzy Rs.2553 in March
2000 and fell to below Rs 80 in mid-2001. Sharma claimed that he still got
his clients the best deal, buying the stock well before its peak and exiting
before the crash. Great, but then this was no better than a punter entering and
exiting a stock irrespective of such heavy stuff like free cash flow, return on
invested capital and fair value – central elements in First Global’s vaunted
research. It was also totally out of line with their view about other
investment bankers and analysts for being opportunists. But it certainly
earned them a fat fee.
Remarkably, alongside some truly outstanding research, one of First
Global’s favourite stocks remained Global Tele, another controversial
company and among the top three favourites of Ketan Parekh (along with
Zee and HFCL). Global Tele moved from nowhere to Rs 3550 and dropped
to around Rs 100 in mid-April 2001 but has remained a ‘Strong Buy’ of First
Global. Everybody, who has had a nodding acquaintance of what Global
Tele’s business and its key promoters are all about, were intrigued. And so
were analysts and fund managers. Did the same considerations that drove
them to be bullish about Global Tele, also play a role in their two crown
achievements like calling Telco a Buy at Rs 239 with a target price of Rs
1000? The stock is now Rs 60. Vikas WSP, a discovery of First Global for
the FIIs, as exposed by The Economic Times , neither had a professional setup nor even a wage bill worthy of a decent company. First Global moved the
stock from Rs 80-90 levels all the way to Rs 1400 and it later fell to Rs 200,
despite great profitability.
On 2 nd March, when the finance ministry ordered SEBI to investi-gate
the post-Budget crash, the stock exchanges identified First Global as one of
the four firms, which allegedly indulged in massive bear hammering.
Exactly eleven days later their investment in Tehelka.com made became the
subject of much speculation. The Tehelka tapes were intriguingly released at
exactly the same time that Parliament was debating the payment crisis on the
stock markets. Did Shankar and Devina know about the Tehelka
investigations? Was that why they were bearish? And were the tapes released
at the same time as the debate in Parliament to create more chaos? They
vehemently deny all three charges.

Devina Mehra claimed on television that they are minority shareholders of
Tehelka (just 15%). But First Global was Tehelka’ s sole financier for which
their 15% stake was in line with the way dotcoms were funded. Tehelka had
virtually no revenues. How did it finance the sting operations on cricket
(courtesy, Manoj Prabhakar) and defence deals, the latter costing about Rs
30 lakh? And how could Shankar and Devina not be calling the shots as the
sole financiers? If they did, they surely knew about the investigation. They
deny it.
Interestingly, First Global tried to organise funds for Tehelka from KVP
Ventures, a so-called venture fund set up by Ketan Parekh, Vinay Maloo and
Kerry Packer. Negotiations fell through and instead, Zee Telefilms initially
agreed to take a 26% stake. Zee News took the lead in repeatedly
broadcasting the tapes to the world, even as it pretended that Ketan Parekh
and Scam 2001 did not happen.
The SEBI investigation on the market crash unearthed First Global’s
strange practices, large speculative trades and curious business associates.
From being a research-driven, ethical and accountable broking firm, First
Global was suddenly seen as speculators, attempting to manipulate the
market, suspected to be front-running their client’s transactions and supping
with shadowy brokers like Nirmal Bang. At least, that is what the SEBI
report points out.
Once exposed, First Global adopted a policy of countering every charge
against them with great aggression. It abused the Income Tax officers (for
which Sharma was arrested), SEBI and all journalists who did not toe the
First Global line. Sharma called The Economic Times a rag and shot off a
barrage of abusive and often childish emails at us, calling us corrupt and
stupid and “ready to wag our tails before SEBI, which was acting on behalf
of a totalitarian regime.”
In fact, immediately after they were targeted as a ‘short sellers’ and
‘manipulators’ they held a press conference denying any short selling and
claimed to be actually net buyers during a three-day period around Budget
time. When more details of their large short positions came out, they charged
that they were being victimised because of their association with Tehelka.

They claimed in another press conference and several press releases that
SEBI’s report was full of falsehoods, wrong data and foolish interpretations.
First Global had six associate firms: one each at UK and USA for its
membership applications there, a Mauritius-based investment company for
arbitrage in GDR/ADRs; First Global the portfolio manager, First Global the
Depository Participant and finally Vruddhi Confinvest India Pvt. Ltd. which
is its proprietary sub-brokerage firm.
SEBI’s investigation found that even though they themselves had
memberships at BSE and NSE, many proprietary trades of Shankar Sharma
and Devina Mehra were routed through the Vruddhi, Bang Equity Broking
and Bang Securities Pvt. Ltd (a sub-broker of Nirmal Bang). Bang in turn
introduced Sharma to Palombe Securities and Finance, a non-descript
broking firm that too through another entity called CSL Securities. Because
of these complex introductions, Palombe and CSL Securities split the
brokerage earned from Sharma, which was Rs 30 lakh for the year 2000-01.
The routing of trades and the payment of brokerage fees to these small-time
firms, prima facie, indicated an attempt to hide large market operations, said
SEBI. First Global’s explanation to SEBI was that the firm traded through
Nirmal Bang when they had exhausted their trading limits under SEBI
norms, but SEBI’s investigation found such routing even when exposure
limits were available on their own cards.
SEBI charged that First Global was a heavy net seller in the Jan-March
2001 period (particularly between 12 th February and 16 th March) on BSE
in stocks like Global Telesystems, HFCL and Satyam. At one time, HFCL
sales alone amounted to 18% of the net sale position on the exchange.
Vruddhi had large forward sales position in volatile scrips like Wipro,
Satyam, MTNL, State Bank, HFCL and Infosys when the market was
tanking according to SEBI. The sales were covered between 28 th February
and 28 th March. The depository records show Vruddhi did not hold these
shares. They were naked short sales. SEBI asserted that although its
investigations were hampered by the search and seizure operations of the
Income Tax department, its own findings clearly indicated “structured
arrangements in the garb of arbitrage trading, collusive trades, attempts to
depress the market, and prima facie violations” of various regulations

including those on fraudulent and unfair trading practices. First Global
continued stonewalling and ranting against SEBI and other authorities while
the ban on its brokerage business forced it to close down most of its offices.
It subsequently, benefited from bleeding heart media reports (that never got
into the facts) and also from SEBI’s carefully planned inaction in persuing
the mountain of evidence despite explicit JPC’s recommendation to do so.

The quiet operator: Nirmal Bang
Until SEBI identified Nirmal Bang as one of the big operators in the run
up to Yashwant Sinha’s much-acclaimed Budget, few outside the trading
community had heard of the man. Yet, as Sucheta wrote in The Indian
Express way back in January 2000, Nirmal Bang was as important to large
market operations as the more glamorous and better known names such as
Ketan Parekh or Nemish Shah. Unlike them, Nirmal Bang did not make
prices move but he was indispensable to the process of doing so. His
multiple cards and sub-broking entities created a nation-wide network that
was a magnet for day traders and the fastest way of spreading the word that a
certain stock was ‘in play’. Moreover, he had this nice habit of managing his
finances through a delicate balancing of cash flow and never hassling clients
for margin payments.
Bang operated through five entities: Bama Securities Ltd., member of
NSE, Nirmal Bang Securities and Bang Equity Broking, both members of
BSE and two sub-broking firms, Bang Securities and Nadi Finance and
Investment. These were registered sub-brokers to three entities – NBS, BSL
and Suresh Rathi Securities.
SEBI investigation has documented reams of Bang’s transactions by his
multiple trading entities as evidence of heavy short sales in the period
leading up to Budget 2001. It has also pinned down these heavy sales to
specific time slots when they were clearly geared to precipitate a collapse in
stock prices with a clear “manipulative intent”. For instance, on 2 nd March
2001, in the space of seven minutes between 12.35 to 12.42 hrs, when the
Global Telesystems price were in the throes of a 16% collapse, three of the
Bang brokerage firms had sold several lakh shares – a clear attempt to create
panic in that counter.
Bang was a magnet for the biggest and best in the business. Whether it
was ace speculator Ketan Parekh or a research-driven Shankar Sharma, each
distinctly different in their operating styles from the other, they all traded
through Bang. Yet, Bang himself remained determinedly low profile. He
stayed away from the press, never appeared on television and even the
elaborate attempt of The Indian Express to photograph him came a cropper.

Nobody knew what he looked like and they captured the wrong guy on film.
His speciality was his curious mix of clients and an ability to juggle all their
interests and operations without a conflict.
SEBI’s sleuths found that Shankar Sharma, chief of First Global Securities
was a big client of Bang. Sharma’s companies had entered highly curious
‘synchronised trades’ of over Rs 50 crore with Vruddhi Confinvest India
Ltd. a proprietary sub-brokerage outfit of First Global. These trades were
conducted between 20 th February and 2 nd March and the orders had
perfectly matching scrips, quantity and prices leading to a suspicion of
manipulative circular trades. SEBI says that there is a “definite pattern of
circular trading between First Global and the Nirmal Bang group for
proprietary trades of Shankar Sharma, which have been structured by
synchronising the order entry.” The convoluted routing of deals, said SEBI,
raised the suspicion of front running, since First Global was a big dealer for
domestic and foreign institutional investors. First Global had claimed that it
was purely a way of transferring business to suit exposure limits on their
cards.
Palombe Securities, a sub-broking firm, told SEBI that its “main business
was jobbing and investment on its own account and introducing clients to
other brokers and sub-brokers, earning broker-age through these
introductions.” One Bhaskar Hingad runs the firm, and it had an oddly
complex relationship with leading market operators. One of its directors was
a former associate of the late Manu Manek, a big bear operator who, during
the 1980s used to be the kingpin of BSE.
Palombe was well connected and had trading terminals of Nirmal Bang’s
various entities installed at its office. It was also very close to Ketan Parekh
who conducted a big chunk of his operations through the firm. Yet, it is
Palombe who introduced Shankar Sharma to Nirmal Bang; that too through
yet another firm called Consortium Securities. Palombe Securities and CSL
shared the credit for introducing Shankar Sharma to Bang Securities and
split 50% of the introductory brokerage of Rs 30 lakh in the year 2000-2001.
SEBI also found instances of liberal transfer of funds between Palombe,
Nirmal Bang and Shankar Sharma, underlining the closeness of their
relationship. It was Palombe again who introduced Ketan Parekh to CSL or
the Consortium Group, which then went on to become a large operator for

Ketan. Consortium had three entities with memberships at the BSE, NSE
and the Delhi Stock Exchange and sub-broking outfits, registered with
Vikram Kenia Securities and Bang Equity Broking. Palombe in turn, was a
client of CSL, and its accounts in the Consortium books show that after the
end of February 2001, when its balances were down to zero, it has had
serious payment problems and has been maintaining debit balances.
SEBI’s limited review of the CSL Group’s records indicated the need for a
detailed inquiry into its large trading operations on its own account as well
as for Ketan Parekh, First Global, Palombe Securities and Nirmal Bang. For
instance, CSL’s bank accounts show large unsecured loans of over Rs 10
crore from five corporates including four companies belonging to HFCL and
one belonging to Max India. SEBI and the Department of Company Affairs
need to probe these for diversion of funds. Apart from this, Omega Finhold
an associate of CSL received inter-corporate funds from some companies,
which were again used for Ketan Parekh’s operations.
These investigations would nail down broker-corporate nexus – how
companies divert their money for their market operations. The Videocon,
BPL, Sterlite nexus with Harshad Mehta may seem puny compared to what
was going on in Scam 2001.
Anand Rathi, one of the most suave and dynamic Presidents of BSE,
attained the dubious distinction of being the second successive BSE chief to
be forced out of office for having misused his position as the head of the
exchange. Rathi was accused of having used and passed on market
information to short sellers. A tape containing Rathi’s conversation with
surveillance officials was leaked to the press and SEBI forced him out.
However, he admitted to no wrongdoing and insisted that he resigned only to
maintain the dignity of the exchange. The irony: just as Rathi’s predecessor,
Jaswantlal Chotalal was asked to resign a few days before his term was
supposed to end in 1998, Rathi had to go just before he was scheduled to end
his term at the end of the month.
The two situations were similar. In June 1998, the BSE president as well
as other broker-office bearers had allowed a set of brokers to break into the
trading system at the dead of night and insert synchronised trades to cover
up a large default. At that time, BSE officials were trying to defuse a

payment crisis caused by the rampant price rigging in BPL, Videocon and
Sterlite by Harshad Mehta on his celebrated return to the market.
There were two charges against Rathi, a former senior executive of Aditya
Birla, who witnessed a meteoric rise between 1997 and 2001. The first was
his misuse of official position to access trade information, which gave him
specific knowledge about the financial difficulties of stockbroker Ketan
Parekh. The second was that he may have passed this on to brokers who
were present in his office during the phone call and that they then indulged
in heavy short sales and knocked the BSE Sensex down by 177 points.

Chapter 22
Nothing Official About It
Losses in the grey
market of Kolkata
could be easily
around Rs 2000 crore
while the official
defaults have been
clumsily papered
over.

The nerve centre of the Scam 2001 was not Mumbai, the
financial capital but the decrepit City of Joy, Kolkata. In fact,
most of the action was not even official but took place in the huge grey
market that has flourished for decades in the city. Kolkata was the largest
illegal trading centre in the country, and its money power to finance private
trading positions was completely disproportionate to its sick economy.
According to one estimate, losses in the grey market on account of
collapsing K-10 stocks could easily be around Rs 2000 crore, and the official
defaults have been clumsily papered over. The CSE story if properly
investigated will prise open the role of the exchange, UTI, SEBI, Ketan
Parekh and one notorious company, DSQ Software and its promoter, Dinesh
Dalmia.
If the CSE attracted speculators and financiers from across the country, it
was because the “unofficial” business was conducted as smoothly as the
official trading. That attracted hefty badla rates, which were normally paid
out in cash without a hitch. The official and the unofficial businesses were so
closely intertwined that trying to understand one without the other is
meaningless.

In fact, to some Kolkata punters, there was nothing unofficial about the
huge speculative market. Its badla sessions were openly done until midMarch 2001. Even after the crisis, Kolkata operators were lamenting the fact
that for the first time in decades, CSE had failed to conduct the ‘ badla ’
session as scheduled on Thursday. One such operator was baffled when
asked if he was referring to the unofficial badla session. To him, the only
difference between the official and unofficial sessions was that one was a
“computer ka badla” (carry-forward transactions through the automated
system) and the other was a “computer ke bahar wala badla ” (transactions
outside the computer system). Both were equally sacrosanct. The unofficial
market achieved this level of sanctity only because SEBI determinedly
looked the other way even when unofficial badla sessions were conducted
right on the floor of the exchange with the business press routinely
publishing the rates.
Like elsewhere, the payment crisis at CSE was because of huge positions
in the free-falling K-10 scrips. The losses in unofficial trades alone were
about Rs 2000 crore. The outstanding position of the top six market
operators was more than Rs 150 crore each. This did not include
industrialists from Mumbai who traded through the big firms.
The situation on the official market was just as bad. The CSE authorities,
which had claimed that a Rs 96 crore payment problem for the 1 st March
settlement had been resolved, admitted a week later that Rs 40 crore still
remained unpaid. They claimed to have invoked bank guarantees to bridge
the gap. For the settlement ending 8 th March, CSE admitted to a Rs 15 crore
gap, but knowledgeable Kolkata operators refused to believe this figure.
They suspected that things were much worse and pointed out that the
settlement was done at a location outside CSE, because the office-bearers
feared that some operators may become violent.
Even then, the whole attempt to manage the pay-in problems and defaults
were amazingly ham-handed. CSE accepted shares of a few volatile scrips as
collateral against margins, scrips which were part of Ketan’s list of
favourites, such as HFCL, DSQ Software, Zee and Global Tele. CSE was
also guilty of accepting post-dated cheques for margin payments instead of

debiting brokers’ accounts and these were clearly not worth the paper. Many
of these cheques bounced and exacerbated the crisis. Several influential
brokers were allowed to continue trading even when their financial
difficulties had become apparent. It failed to check brokers who had already
exceeded their exposure limits and used capital deposited against exposure
limits as margin payment. No wonder that the Rs 500 crore margin claimed
by the President Kamal Parekh when the scam first hit CSE, simply vanished
upon closer inspection. Even if the bourse had deactivated the terminals of
defaulting members a little earlier, the damage would have been better
contained.
The bizarre stories emanating out of Kolkata would be hilarious if they
were not so repulsive. When JPC called Kolkata officials for a briefing in
late June 2001, CSE’s executive director Tapas Datta narrated this wonderful
story about how the bourse’s margin calculation system had a serious flaw
(bug). When the value of margin payable went above a certain number (the
ED called it ‘number of fields’), the margin payable simply showed up as
zero. The exchange blamed it on the software supplier who absolutely
denied the charge. The upshot of the incredibly convenient ‘bug’ was that
the margins of the largest brokers, later declared defaulters, could not be
correctly calculated. The bourse apparently realised the enormity of the flaw
only when it was hit by huge defaults.
A big source of losses in CSE was money investors had put in for steady
return in badla financing (financing carry forward trades) in Mumbai. Many
BSE brokers were taking money from clients on the pretext of investing in
the official badla but were routing the money to Calcutta’s unofficial badla
market since the rates were much higher (24-30% compared to 10-12% in
BSE).
When the K-10 scrips were collapsing, the safe money that clients thought
they had put in badla , was diverted to fund the huge losses of speculators.
Many BSE brokers themselves used up the badla money to complete their
pay-ins. Client losses may have run up to about
Rs 600 crore. These brokers were issuing fake contract notes or client
confirmation orders of these transactions, keeping up the pretence that the
money was safe. Most of the transactions never got routed through the

official systems of BSE and NSE and were just internal entries of the
brokers. So, the clients are not secured by the exchange.
The CSE scandal is an obvious case of not only SEBI’s supervisory
failure, but a shameful collusion between UTI, SEBI and CSE that let off the
operators and gypped the unit holders of UTI. This put enormous pressure
on a tattered UTI and led to the exit of Chairman P Subramanyam in
disgrace in early July. There has been no pressure on SEBI so far. It knew all
about CSE’s misdemeanours. Several of its inspections had grossly indicted
the bourse, but SEBI failed to initiate corrective and disciplinary measures.
Its report on the payment crisis and the last three inspection reports list most
of CSE’s scandalous practices and yet it joined hands with UTI to bail out
CSE and the notorious operators who controlled it.
When CSE was teetering under the weight of collapsing junk stocks of
Ketan Parekh, UTI stepped in to buy a large chunk of DSQ shares pledged
by Dinesh Singhania, former CSE president who defaulted. It also bought
large and inexplicable chunks of HFCL, Zee and Global Tele in March 2001,
but apparently not from CSE. For this alone, the top UTI top brass needs to
be sacked.
Consider how similar was UTI’s role to that of Shriram Mutual Fund. In
June 1998, Shriram Mutual Fund bought 1,20,600 shares of Videocon on
BSE to bail brokers on the verge of default while furthering Harshad
Mehta’s comeback attempt with price rigging as his main operating strategy.
On 2 nd February 2000, SEBI decreed that Shriram Mutual Fund’s actions
were ‘detrimental to the interest of its investors; asked the Fund’s sponsors
to pay up the price difference of Rs 19 per share between the purchase price
and market price of Videocon shares; asked the Managing Director and two
of his executives to resign and ordered a change in the composition of
Shriram’s Board of Trustees. Now what did UTI do in Kolkata in MarchApril 2001 that was any different to Shriram Mutual’s role?
On 9 th March UTI, bought 13,30,000 shares of DSQ Software to bail out
CSE, at Rs 189, a big discount to the ruling market price, according to UTI’s
executive director BG Daga. Daga also said that shares worth Rs 25 crore
were bought directly from CSE – to help the bourse complete the

controversial settlement No. 148 – shares belonging to defaulting broker
Dinesh Singhania.
Now, UTI already held large quantities of DSQ, of which around 56 lakh
shares were purchased at an average price of nearly Rs 2000 in FebruaryMarch 2000. It was only in Jan-Feb 2001 that it had begun to sell small
chunks of the scrip (five lakh shares). In fact, UTI’s average holding price
for the 23.7 lakh DSQ Software shares that it owned was approximately Rs
760.
From its bailout level of Rs 189, DSQ Software went down to a third in
July 2001 when UTI closed the exit door of US-64. This meant a loss of Rs
25 crore to unit holders in one bailout deal alone. Even though UTI bought
at a discount to market, it was surely obvious to everybody that all shares
associated with stock broker Ketan Parekh would continue to drop for
several weeks more. UTI’s decision to bail out CSE looked even more
controversial considering that it slashed payout on its MIP-95 and MIP-96
schemes to five per cent; and that it was already discussing a second bailout
of the US-64 scheme with the government. The US-64 faced a shortfall of
over Rs 6000 crore bet-ween its Net Asset Value and its repurchase price.
So, if Shriram Mutual Fund was punished for bailing out stock brokers at the
cost of its unit holders, then so should UTI. In the Shriram case SEBI had
said that the purchase price was “not in the best interest of the investors and
were made for extraneous considerations”. It also said that “schemes of the
mutual fund were not handled in a prudent, diligent manner” as expected
from a fund run on “professional lines”.
All this applied to UTI’s decision to bail out CSE and its operators as
well. What made it more galling was that the bailout was supervised by none
other than a divisional chief of SEBI with Daga of UTI acting as an
observer. Moreover, the SEBI Chairman himself oversaw the entire bailout
effort. Daga’s argument was that UTI’s deal was “not similar” to Shriram’s,
because the shares were the property of CSE and not the brokers and the
cheque was paid directly to the exchange. Nevertheless, a broker had
pledged the shares and UTI’s action, by causing a loss to its unit holders, had
betrayed its fiduciary functions. Secondly, Daga said that Shriram Mutual
Fund had bought above the market, while UTI’s acquisition was at a
discount. Within weeks that argument seemed laughable when the share

price went down to almost a quarter of its value. Thirdly, Daga says that
CSE offered him shares of three other companies but UTI had only picked
up DSQ Software. Great stock pick, after bailing out brokers holding HFCL,
Global Tele and Zee Telefilms in March! Except that DSQ and its promoter
was probably involved in some sort of a fraud.
The CSE bailout showed that UTI could not be bothered about
responsibility to small savers from whom it was picking up cash while SEBI
was more interested in solving the problems of thieves rather than acting as
the cop. It is one thing for the stock market regulator to make efforts to avoid
a contagion effect, and quite another to do so at the cost of unit holders of
UTI.
UTI, already bailed out once at the cost of the general public, had
drastically cut the returns on its monthly income schemes and aban-doned
the Rajlaxmi scheme, leaving many a little girl in the lurch. Also, if SEBI
had wanted to rescue CSE, it ought to have approached the finance ministry
instead of going along with a surreptitious deal with UTI. The question is,
when a mutual fund transgresses its fiduciary duty in consultation with or at
the request of the regulator, who will play the cop? May be JPC, which at
first did not want to investigate UTI.
Investigations into CSE will not only bring out into the open the punters’
positions in K-10 scrips and the rescue efforts UTI and SEBI mounted for
them. It will reveal a lot about the corporate angle in the scam, most notably
a key member of the K-10 portfolio, DSQ Software. For the last three years,
DSQ and its managing director, Dinesh Dalmia has made more news for his
stock market operations than for his management skills. The scrip rose to a
dizzy Rs 2800 last year, to hurtle down to around Rs 50 in end-June. Dalmia
was known to be a big speculator in the unofficial market at Kolkata and
many of the top defaulters of CSE were found stuck with massive quantities
of DSQ Software shares some of which UTI very generously picked up.
Dalmia, son-in-law of OP Agrawal of Ganapati Exports against whom
there are a variety of revenue cases, has led a chequered life, making and
losing huge amounts of money at different times. An inveterate gambler in
stocks, he had a chance to straighten things for himself once for all when, in
1999, DSQ attracted the interest of private-equity fund of Bank of America

and Ketan Parekh. BankAm wanted a majority stake and Dalmia was
supposed to step down from the DSQ board while continuing to be an
investor with a 5% holding. The new owners would use the Rs 220 crore
coming into the company to clear DSQ’s loans, contingent liabilities (bank
guarantees). However, all that happened was that the stock was rigged up to
Rs 2800 and Ketan Parekh probably made lots of money on several rounds
of buying and selling. Dalmia did not step down, BankAm exited, no
professional lasted long enough and whatever money came into DSQ went
right back into the market. But among the most startling stories of Dinesh
Dalmia’s shenanigans is DSQ Software’s fictitious takeover and increase in
its capital and circulation of fake shares!
Dalmia wanted to meet Sucheta on 25 th May 2001, because he said that
he wanted to clarify ‘certain issues and misconceptions’ about DSQ
Software. He said the company was debt-free and was among the only
Indian companies to have paid back all the money it owed banks and
institutions (it had been listed as a defaulter with half a dozen banks
including Indian Bank and HDFC Bank). Among other things, he said that
he was now off speculation and determined to focus exclusively on running
his company (like Arjuna in Mahabharata , he said). He was confident that
DSQ would be another Infosys. Dalmia’s determination seemed impressive.
That was in the future. Before that there were some niggling clarifications to
be made. Why had the company’s capital increased Rs 30.5 crore to Rs 47
crore in March and if he had acquired a company during that time, why was
it such a secret? Dalmia said that DSQ had acquired a San Jose, Californiabased company called Fortuna Technologies. He claimed that all disclosures
were made to the six stock exchanges on which DSQ was listed. Could one
get some details? He assured that it will be emailed the very next day. He
went silent. Sucheta wrote to him a dozen times asking for the information.
His replies, coming from his office were a range of excuses: he was abroad,
he was unwell, finally he said that under the agreement with Fortuna
Technologies, the takeover could not be announced until the employees of
Fortuna were transferred to DSQ. What about disclosure to Indian
shareholders and stock exchanges? He simply stopped replying.
Intrigued, Sucheta asked SEBI, BSE and NSE for information. SEBI’s
executive director Partip Kar confirmed that the company had not informed

SEBI about the acquisition/merger; he also said that there were indications
of a violation of the listing agreement and the takeover rules. SEBI would
investigate the matter further, he said. BSE, as usual, did not bother to reply
and NSE said that DSQ may have violated listing rules. It said that it was in
dialogue with the company to get the details and planned to initiate some
disciplinary action. A fund manager from Chennai also wrote in to say that
no information was available with the Madras Stock Exchange when he
checked for it.
DSQ’s website said nothing about the acquisition or the increase in
capital, even though the site was updated until April 2001. There was no
mention of Fortuna at all. Instead, right until April, there were press
clippings about its negotiations and re-negotiations with San Vision
Technologies of the US. At that stage, the Fortuna Technologies’ acquisition
got really intriguing. Firstly, Fortuna was not in San Jose, as claimed by
Dalmia but in Sunnyvale, California. Secondly, a decision to issue 1.5 crore
shares on preferential/private placement basis to certain OCBs was made at a
board meeting on 10 th November 2000. Then at an extraordinary general
meeting on 11 th December, shareholder approval was sought for the
acquisition of Fortuna Techno-logies Inc. by issuing 1.4 crore shares.
Subsequently, the company announced to its board of directors at a
meeting on 12 th January 2001, that 1.40 crore shares had been allotted at Rs
675 each, in dematerialised form to three Mauritius based companies –
Technology Trust (60 lakh shares), Softee Corporation (40 lakh shares) and
New Vision Investments (40 lakh shares). These shares bore the distinctive
numbers 33250001-47250000. The distinctive numbers were important as
future events unfolded.
It was unclear if these companies in turn owned Fortuna or how Fortuna
was ever acquired, but the allotment of shares itself was queer. DSQ, armed
with an auditors’ certificate confirming the allotment, informed the NSDL
that shares bearing the distinctive number mentioned should be credited to
the three Mauritius based companies’ accounts. NSDL in turn said that the
shares could be credited only after DSQ receives in-principle listing
approval from all its stock exchanges.

On 28 th May 2001, CSE received a listing application form DSQ wrote to
all exchanges stating that they had received 10 lakh equity shares in physical
form bearing the distinctive numbers 43250001-44250000 from Harish
Biyani, one of the defaulting members, against his payment liability. Since
these were within the band of numbers allegedly issued to the Mauritiusbased companies, it would appear that DSQ issued at least some shares with
the same distinctive numbers twice – once in physical form to some Kolkata
brokers and a second time to the Mauritius-based companies. The question
is, was DSQ printing share certificates to bailout Kolkata brokers who had
lost heavily due to excessive speculation in DSQ shares? How much of this
was punter Dinesh Dalmia’s responsibility? Also, were the 13.3 lakh shares
purchased by UTI from broker Dinesh Singhania (through CSE) in the same
distinctive number band? And finally, why was Dinesh Singhania so
adamantly reluctant to part with information?
Finally, the clincher came after Sucheta’s article appeared in
The Indian Express . Remember, DSQ had passed a resolution allotting 1.4
crore shares at Rs 675 each to three Mauritius-based companies to acquire
Fortuna. The managing director of Fortuna Technologies, TC Ashok,
emailed her saying “I would like to clarify that the three Mauritius
companies you mentioned in your article neither own Fortuna, nor Fortuna
owns them.” He says: “I own Fortuna USA 100 % and Fortuna USA does
not own any other company.” Instead he owns Fortuna Technologies India
Pvt. Ltd., which works exclusively for Fortuna USA. The question then is
who did Dinesh Dalmia allot 1.4 crore shares to in a hush-hush EGM last
December? Also, what kind of governance and disclosure practices are
reflected in his getting away with such falsehoods?
The mystery of DSQ Software shares did not end here. Suddenly, in June
there was a flurry of activity on the CSE to have the same 10 lakh shares of
DSQ (within the band of 1.4 crore allotted for the takeover) deposited by the
stockbroker Harish Biyani released to him. Biyani, who until recently had no
money at all and was declared a defaulter for his inability to pay Rs 30 crore
to the bourse, suddenly offered to cough up a hefty Rs 26 crore (in
installments) as a settlement. The condition was that his suspension be
revoked, his card reactivated, the balance money waived and the
controversial DSQ shares which were in CSE’s custody released to him.

Kolkata operators believe that somebody is desperate to get the DSQ soft
shares released to hush up the problem of duplicate numbers.
This is one story that has all the dimensions of Scam 2001: a software
company that had a meteoric rise, a shady promoter, nexus with operator –
part of K-10 list, massive losses for retail investors, a suspicious bailout by
UTI, violation of company laws, violation of listing rules, and possible fraud
of duplicate shares. It has all the key ingredients of Scam 2001 and most of it
happening thanks to the fertile unofficial market of Kolkata. That, at least, is
official now.

Chapter 23
Epilogue

Deaths of key scam
characters, Reserve Bank’s
abysmal bank supervision,
its curious support for
Global Trust Bank,
another inane JPC report,
the DSQ Software saga
and media manipulation

I ndia has had two major financial market scams within a
decade. Neither of them has been resolved. Investigations of both have
meandered to a farce. Little money has been recovered. Compared to the
initial drama of arrests and media frenzy, key culprits among regulators,
politicians, mutual funds, banks and government officials have not been
penalised. Some brokers and speculators central to the scams have had their
lives disrupted for a while but their ill-gotten wealth has not been
systematically tracked down and they continue to trade through regional
stock exchanges. The regulators have been repeatedly caught sleeping but
heads have not rolled. Meanwhile, several personalities from the previous
scam have expired. We offer an insight about the key developments since
2001 when our last edition appeared.

For whom death tolls
As Mumbai was only half way through its New Year celebrations on 31 st
December 2001, the central character of the scam of 1992 was suffering a

massive heart attack. The scam investigation had already taken a toll on the
47-year old former Big Bull. His hair had thinned and was streaked with
grey and the years had added several kilos to his large frame; worry lines
marked the once ebullient face as Harshad struggled to keep his natural
smile in place. The heart attack ended all that.
At the time of his death, Harshad had been locked up in the Thane Central
Jail on the outskirts of Mumbai with his brother Sudhir Mehta for company.
The court had rejected their bail plea in a case alleging that they
misappropriated 27 lakh shares of several blue chip companies then valued
at Rs 250 crore. He was moved to the Thane Civil Hospital when he
complained of chest pain. He suffered another massive heart attack right in
the hospital. After a strenuous attempt to revive him, he was declared dead at
five minutes past midnight. Thus ended a-rags-to-incredible-riches-tonotoriety story that had gripped the imagination of the nation for two short
years in 1991-92 and turned Harshad into the first superstar of the stock
markets. It was an unlikely end for an eternal optimist, one who had the
ability to revel even in the glare of negative publicity. And for a short time
he had converted his big dream of untold riches, flashy cars and a super
luxury apartment into reality. He wanted to be the Pied Piper leading
investors to mega riches. Is there a message in the fact that his last moments
were in a jail cell and a government hospital?
In fact, even his death was not without controversy. Harshad’s lawyer,
Mahesh Jethmalani tried to give the entire episode a new spin and a political
colour. He alleged that three persons Kailash Gupta, Sameer Jani and Dinesh
Shah had in fact siphoned off a large chunk of money realised through the
introduction of benami shares but were let off. He alleged that the three had
powerful political links and had used their clout to scuttle a police
investigation into the deal. He openly alleged in the court that the high
profile DCP, Sanjay Pandey, was transferred because he was on the trail of
these three persons. The Court directed the CBI to follow up Jethmalani’s
allegations. It led to nowhere.
Many of those involved in the Scam of 1992 have escaped the law or are
caught up in endless litigation. But the death toll among them is also
remarkable. By late 2004 barely half a dozen cases had run the gauntlet of
litigation and been decided by the Supreme Court of India. Hiten Dalal is the

only dramatis personae of Scam 1992 who has been convicted by the court.
Most others have simply moved on to answer their maker. It’s a long list
starting with MJ Pherwani and including MN Goiporia, CL Khemani, RL
Kamath (all of SBI), SG Gadhe of CBI, K Dharmapal of Fairgrowth and JP
Gandhi, a trusted lieutenant of Bhupen Dalal and key to unravelling the
trades involving Standard Chartered, Bank of Karad and Metropolitan
Cooperative Bank.
On 28 th September 2001, Nirmal Bang, a broker who facilitated massive
trades between the various scam-accused, died in a car crash when the tyres
of his car burst. Bimal Gandhi, a 41 year old, successful stockbroker and
owner of Dil Vikas Finance and Eldorado Investments, had committed
suicide in mid-2001. Before that Ajay Thakker killed himself in April 2001.
Thakker used to collect large amounts of money from small depositors, and
ran a successful business lending it to the film industry. He was lured by the
illusion of higher returns from the stock exchange. The many deaths and
constant changes in the CBI team broke the continuity of the investigation.
In complex financial matters it is the best recipe for destroying any chances
of resolution. Consequently, the meandering trials seem set to roll on for at
least another decade with only unfortunate death promising a final closure.

Another bank collapse
In 2001, Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative Bank (MMCB) went bust
following Ketan Parekh’s uncontrolled speculation. But Global Trust Bank
(GTB), another beehive of speculators, brokers and shady businessmen,
seemed to have escaped, thanks to its deep political connections in Andhra
Pradesh and covert support from the RBI. But it survived only for three more
years. GTB was run by Ramesh Gelli, a high-profile banker who had earlier
headed Vysya Bank. He was the only banker ever to be honoured with a
Padma Shri. GTB’s banking licence was in fact granted to Jayanta Madhab
and not to Gelli. Madhab was initially on GTB’s board but returned to
Assam soon after. Jayant Gelli quickly mobilised his diamond trader friends
and they cobbled together its Rs 100 crore capital through some complex
financing arrangements. The red flags over GTB’s operations started going
up in 1999. It may seem outrageous, but the RBI clearly knew how bad

things were as far back as in 1999-00 but tried to paper it over. Ironically, the
first revelation came from RBI’s own Department of Supervision (DoS) but
it was forcibly diluted. That inspection report had touched on every critical
issue that eventually contributed to GTB’s collapse including lending to
Ketan Parekh, as well as some high profile companies and several
investment companies belonging to the promoter group. It gives us an idea
about the way the bank was being run.
The report drew attention to serious irregularities in the accounts of 18
firms of the Ramesh Gelli group and ‘‘suspected money laundering’’. Here is
one dubious case. In 1999-00, GTB wrote off Rs 82 crore, exactly half of
which (Rs 41.23 crore) was in connection with a single account called Petro
Energy Products Company India (PEPCO). It was allowed to remit money
abroad for a second-hand refinery, although land for the project was not
acquired, technology was obsolete and the project feasibility doubtful. Who
was the real beneficiary of the remittance and the write off? The RBI
inspector suggested this be investigated because the bank had made no
serious effort at recovery. The inspection report listed 10 other companies
where GTB had written off loans within a year, without serious recovery
efforts.
Two sets of industry groups were flagged by the inspection for their
special relationship with GTB in 2000. One was the problem exposure of Rs
150 crore to several Balaji group companies such as Balaji Distilleries,
Balaji Hotels, Balaji Industrial Corporation, Jayaswals Neco, and a further
loan of Rs 46 crore to Pearl Distilleries (60 per cent owned by the Balaji
group). GTB allowed these companies to recklessly run up bad loans, divert
funds within the group to pay off creditors and even subscribed to their
Preference Shares and Debentures, in order to help ‘evergreen’ the loan
accounts.
Another large term loan was to diamond merchant Bharat Shah’s company
Rhiday Real Estate (Rs 43 crore) to finance a Rs 72.49 crore commercial
complex in Mumbai (Trambak Court). The bank floute all prudential
guidelines to lend money to the rich Shah and the loan had already turned
bad by 2000. It had a huge exposure to Bharat Shah’s companies such as
Beautiful Diamonds (Rs 46 crore default), B. Vijaykumar & Co (Rs 131

crore exposure in 2000) and Crystal Gems, while the security cover on these
loans was abysmal. Many of these loans had turned bad even then.
Telltale signs of GTB’s links with speculators were clear in 2000 when
GTB made its infamous preferential allotment of 148 lakh shares worth Rs
125.80 crore to institutions like IFC Washington, Sun F&C, Kotak Mahindra
Finance and Prudential ICICI Fund. Subscribers also included the infamous
Nishkalp Investments, the subsidiary that brought down Tata Finance.
Nishkalp, which turned out to have extremely close connections with a crony
of Ketan Parekh, was the single biggest investor with a Rs 50 crore
allotment. Interestingly, it also had an overdraft facility of exactly Rs 50
crore from GTB, which had also been rolled over several times. Instead of
investigating GTB’s relationship with Nishkalp, RBI supervisors wanted the
inspection report to delete specific names and replace them with generic
references.
Other big allottees were Ketan Parekh entities Nakshatra Software and
Chitrakut Computers. On 22 nd December 2000, Ramesh Gelli had explained
with a flowchart how Chitrakut and Nakshatra had funded their purchase of
GTB’s preferential shares. Both were funded through money from MMCB
and Bank of India (BOI) among others. So, when the bank was placed under
moratorium on 24 th July 2004, Ketan Parekh’s dues to the bank were nearly
Rs 240 crore, without including bad loans to crony industrialists in the scam
of 2001.
GTB wasn’t merely an overzealous lender that chased business
indiscriminately, but the very hub of Ketan Parekh’s activities. All his
corporate cronies, their investment companies, as well as Parekh’s own
network of investment firms had accounts at GTB, as did First Global and its
satellites. Post-scam investigations revealed how money has been rapidly
and repeatedly transferred between various accounts of this group, within a
single working day. GTB lent large sums of money to Zee Telefilms and
HFCL, which promptly diverted it to Ketan Parekh. All this has been glossed
over during the post-scam investigations because of Gelli’s powerful
political links. In fact, just when the scam was beginning to unravel there
was an attempt to suppress the entire mess. To bury its bad loans GTB
attempted a merger with UTI Bank.

Although Ramesh Gelli was asked to step down in April 2001, he
continued to run the bank by proxy. As Sridhar Subashri, GTB’s former
executive director and a close confidant of Gelli wrote to a newspaper,
‘‘anyone in the banking sector would be aware’’ that even after Gelli stepped
down from GTB ‘‘he continued to guide decisions of the bank through his
sister, Parimala Anand’’ (a director) and his son Girish Gelli who became a
director in November 2003. Sudhakar Gandhe, who took over as GTB’s
Executive Director, was close to Gelli too. Yet, RBI eagerly accepted Gelli’s
fiction of having distanced himself from the bank.
RBI was protecting GTB for three years even after it had full details of
GTB’s operations. In fact, in February 2004, a confident Gelli was reinducted into the GTB board and it may have been business as usual –
clearly with tacit approval from the RBI. Sucheta then wrote to former
Finance Minister Jaswant Singh asking how Gelli could be back without a
full exoneration. She was told that her concerns were being “addressed by
the RBI”. Prompted by the Finance Ministry, the RBI seems to have induced
Gelli to resign again, and it told the media that its permission hadn’t been
sought.
The subsequent revelation about the size of the problem makes RBI’s
benign attitude to Gelli and GTB, scandalous. Since GTB’s capers and deep
connection with the scam were either clearly identified in the RBI report or
known to the central bank from other sources, we can only conclude that the
regulator was napping – whether by design or by default. In 2003-04, Gelli
attempted to get a foreign private equity fund to take control, with the full
support of RBI. GTB’s managing director Sudhakar Gandhe told
newspapers, “All the problems of the past have been sorted out.” The
pretence ended just 10 months later when the bank was placed under
moratorium and forcibly merged with the Oriental Bank of Commerce. But
even that raised many issues. Did OBC, a publicly listed bank, conduct due
diligence and that too over the weekend? Can we believe that the NPAs of
GTB have been crystallised at around Rs 1,200 crore and no new skeletons
will pop out? Why was RBI desperate to keep scam-infested GTB alive and
protect the reckless management? The saga of GTB takes us to the dark side
of the Indian financial system – extremely poor regulatory oversight by an
opaque, often slothful but Teflon-coated central bank.

Unaccountable regulators
If RBI was seen to be sleeping through the scam of 1992, it was SEBI’s
turn in 2001, which was entirely a stock scam. SEBI was guilty of ignoring
over-speculation or failing to investigate the colossal volumes of Ketan
Parekh. Had it established an audit trail of transactions across bourses, it
would certainly have hit upon Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs) and
doubtful practices such as foreign investments through Participatory Notes
issued abroad. It would also have led to GTB, which formed a hub for
Parekh’s and other scamsters’ financial operations. GTB’s operations, central
to the stock scam of 2001, were happening right in RBI’s domain. Every
investment company of the Parekh group had an account at GTB and
enjoyed generous funding by the private bank. Also, most investment
companies of the big corporate groups whose shares were manipulated by
Ketan Parekh (nicknamed the K-10 companies) banked with GTB, allowing
funds to move in and out of several firms belonging to Ketan Parekh and his
cronies in a single day without anyone getting the slightest inkling about the
nature of the deals.
The scam of 2001 as also the scam of 1992 exposed RBI’s gross
supervisory laxity. Despite banning banks from funding brokers and
restricting their capital-market exposure, RBI failed to oversee banks, there
is also evidence that RBI turned a blind eye to the dubious tricks of the GTB
management and deliberately ignored many warning signals that ultimately
led to its collapse. For instance, senior RBI officials worked hard to tone
down words like ‘ever-greening’ or “NPA investments” to help change the
tenor of the DoS inspection report, referred to earlier. The watering down
process involved shifting the strictures regarding loans to Ketan Parekh,
First Global, and diamond traders from the main report to the annexures.
Although the inspection was completed in September 2000, the report was
released only in January 2001, because RBI’s officials may have wanted to
help GTB bag an insurance licence, say our sources. As an aside, it is
probably worth noting as per a model perfected by foreign banks (see
chapter 14), several RBI officers had their children working for GTB.
The DoS referred all the charges to the central office for action. There is
no evidence of action by the central office. It could have questioned GTB (as
in the 1992 scam) and discovered Ketan Parekh’s nexus well before the

bubble burst. RBI’s Hyderabad office had unearthed clear evidence of ‘self
dealing’ in the bank’s shares by the promoter group, through a pattern on
clean short-term loans to a range of brokers. This too was never investigated.
Among the many red flags RBI chose to ignore were price manipulation
and accumulation of over five per cent of the equity of GTB by a market
operator. DoS had written to SEBI about “unusual activity in the GTB scrip”
and the allegation that an operator was holding more than five per cent of
GTB’s equity.
SEBI’s subsequent investigation in late 2000 and early 2001 showed that
there was definite price manipulation and clear indication that a group of
companies/operators acting in concert held more than five per cent of the
equity. RBI still went ahead and granted “in principle” approval to the
merger of GTB and UTI Bank despite the DoS raising these suspicions. The
manipulated price of GTB was an important factor in deciding the merger
ratio. SEBI wrote to RBI giving it details about its findings by which time
the merger of the two banks was underway.
The RBI insisted that “investigation into price manipulation does not fall
within its purview”. What about GTB’s exposure to brokers, which had
worried the DoS? Its official line was “the RBI regularly monitors the stock
market exposure of banks through quarterly audits. We take appropriate
measures if necessary.” Till GTB went bust, what steps did RBI take?
Nothing effective. Meanwhile, GTB chairman Ramesh Gelli claimed in a
television interview that the bank’s exposure to stockbrokers was strictly
within prudential norms and that its exposure to any individual broker could
not exceed Rs 100 crores.
Yet, the list of the top 100 accounts of GTB contradicted Gelli’s claim.
GTB’s exposure to just two firms belonging to Ketan Parekh, at the time of
the merger announcement, was over Rs 100 crore and at least six other GTB
accounts were either operated by Parekh’s brother or his cousin, acting in
concert with Parekh. GTB also had exposure to at least four other
companies, which were part of the Parekh circle of influence. Curiously
RBI’s quarterly audits did not throw up all this exposure, which, according
to Gelli’s own statement, would fall outside the prudential limits.

Through this period RBI issued letters of support, endorsement and
reassurance on behalf of three private banks — ICICI Bank, Centurion Bank
and GTB. In September 2003, RBI issued a press statement captioned “RBI
welcomes cleaning up of balance-sheet” of GTB. It commended the bank for
having made “special efforts” in recovering non-performing assets (NPAs)
“in accordance with RBI guidelines”. RBI went out of its normal reticent
way to emphasise that while the financial statement showed an overall loss,
the bank had made an operating profit. GTB had reported a net loss of Rs
272 crore (at end March 2003) and provisioning of Rs 309 crore.
The central bank’s eager and sweeping endorsement, even as GTB was in
a deep mess, was stunning. Was it designed to enable the management to bail
out by bringing in a strategic investor? The next big alarm rang in late 2003
when three of the bank’s directors including chairman of the audit committee
Venkappa M. Agadi, quit. The two other directors who left were JV Shetty,
former chairman of Canara Bank and SB Ghosh, a former senior partner of
Price Waterhouse Coopers. These directors had serious differences with the
management and auditors regarding loan loss provisions. The bad loans at
that time were (under) estimated at Rs 350 crore, requiring a fresh capital
infusion of Rs 250-300 crore. The bank accepted their resignations but no
explanation was offered to investors.
If GTB made “special efforts” to clean up its balance sheet, as the RBI
was eager to tell the world, why had the three directors in its audit
committee resigned just before the results were declared? The GTB
management put out the excuse of age factor to explain the exit of Agadi,
who headed its audit committee. But what about JV Shetty and SB Ghosh?
Did the provisioning that was ‘welcomed’ by RBI look fishy to the experts?
RBI did not question the ‘independent’ directors about their exit probably
because it was on the bank’s side. This makes a mockery of corporate
governance regulations and the role of directors. Ironically, NR Narayana
Murthy who headed SEBI’s second Corporate Governance Committee was
also a director of the RBI’s central board. Maybe SEBI should scrap its
corporate governance code, which only forces the better run companies to
observe endless compliance and disclosure regulations.
Even as RBI was busy issuing a certificate to GTB, there were cases of
fresh lending to shady companies. Were the directors who resigned upset

about this? Did they discover bad loans far in excess of the disclosed levels?
They apparently had disagreements with the GTB management about
continued support to a television network company and a large south-based
group, which already had plenty of bad loans in GTB’s books.
The RBI also seemed to have forgotten it was not the bank’s only
regulator and that GTB’s depositors were not the only stakeholders. The
bank was listed on the stock exchanges and subject to SEBI regulation.
Moreover, SEBI had recently moved GTB to the Trade-to-Trade segment, to
curb excess volatility. The RBI press release, propelled the GTB scrip up
7.8% on the day it was issued, despite its huge losses. Wasn’t the RBI
responsible for helping the scrip move up, on false grounds, as it later turned
out? And did the central bank, which has a deputy governor on SEBI’s
board, discuss the release with SEBI before it was issued?
RBI’s role in the Nedungadi Bank case was also equally shocking. While
it was common knowledge that Rajendra Banthia, a close crony of the late
Harshad Mehta, had a free run of the bank, RBI pretended to know nothing.
Banthia was Vice President of the Bombay Stock Exchange in 1998, when it
had notoriously opened the trading system in the middle of the night to enter
fictitious trades and avoid a major market default. He was also responsible
for inducting a former BSE President and public representative on the
Nedungadi board.
In fact, he has been under investigation since the 1992 scam. The RBI
representative on the Nedungadi Board slept peacefully even when Banthia
was officially inducted on the board in December 2000. It was only after the
scam surfaced that RBI’s inspection unearthed illegal “arbitrage” trading
worth Rs 1352 crores through three firms connected with Banthia, which had
caused a loss of Rs 95 crore to Nedungadi Bank. The ‘arbitrage’ was nothing
but a license to indulge in a rampant churning of stocks without leaving any
open positions and the bank board knew the three firms allowed to do such
trades belonged to Banthia. Following hectic recovery efforts Banthia made
good some of the losses, but still owed the bank Rs 34 crore. The JPC was
told that he held over 45-50% of the bank’s equity, although only 20% was
officially held. RBI did nothing even when there were regular press reports
detailing Banthia’s background and misdeeds for over a decade.

RBI’s laxity goes back a long time and is mainly due to its ivory tower
approach to supervision. It does not seek market intelligence and invariably
misses major scams until they are well beyond control. However, unlike
SEBI, which has often come in for scathing criticism, the RBI has been
protected by its silence and banking secrecy laws. RBI officers always
escape responsibility. In 1992, despite clear evidence of having ignored the
diligent reports of an upright officer Augustine Kurias, who had spelt out
lawlessness in different aspects of the securities industry, nobody was held
responsible.
RBI failed to gauge the extent of the rot in finance companies and the
cooperative banking sector. It gave a provisional banking licence to CR
Bhansali, after having rejected applications by the Tatas and Birlas. It failed
to act decisively in the Nedungadi Bank case for an entire decade and
quickly ordered a merger with Punjab National Bank to avoid controversy. It
forgot to regulate Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs) that it had registered,
often with a $10 capital. And they merrily manipulated the stock market
leading to another scam. The Madras High Court has called the RBI
“gullible” (in the case involving Mercantile Credit Corporation) and accused
it of failing to “act with vigour, range, depth and speed that the law required
of it, for protecting the public interest”.
Yet, the RBI, India’s most opaque regulator, is never held accountable.
RBI also ensures that its regulatory lapses are not scrutinised. For instance,
an immunity clause in the amalgamation scheme of GTB with OBC
precludes any suit or legal proceedings against the centre, RBI, OBC and
GTB for anything done in good faith or in pursuance of the Scheme.
The GTB saga also showed up SEBI in poor light. From mid-2004 large
investors were found selling GTB stock in block deals on the bourses, right
up to the declaration of moratorium on July 24 th . Were they privy to inside
information about failure of the restructuring efforts by inducting private
equity investors? The capital market regulator has never investigated these
sales or initiated any action. Instead, from July, SEBI’s ban on Ramesh Gelli
and his group on participating in the market came to an end. Technically, he
was free to go ahead and set up the turnaround fund that he already
announced.

The Department of Company Affairs (DCA) is supposed to be another
key regulatory agency overseeing corporate actions. When the Joint
Parliamentary Committee (JPC) asked questions about corporate
irregularities, DCA came up with outrageous indifference. As per current
practice, Regional Directors (RDs) and Registrars of Companies (RoCs) are
nominated by SEBI on the Governing Board of stock exchanges. The JPC
had asked whether RDs and RoCs could take action if there is any
unreasonable speculation in the market. The DCA Secretary replied that,
“each time there is a movement in the stock market if you rush to a company
and invade it, that kind of tendency is not the right kind of stance to adopt. It
should be based on some solid information”. The JPC emphasised that when
the price of a company’s scrip increased abnormally, it should ring alarm
bells that something wrong is going on and DCA should initiate inspection.
The DCA Secretary said: “we are contemplating on your observation that
when we are there in the stock market, why do we not take action. There is a
lot of truth in what you are saying. We will keep that in mind”.
A Serious Frauds Office was set up under the DCA and the notorious
DSQ Software case was transferred to it for investigation. But the SFO is
rarely seen nor heard of since its inception. DCA suffers not only from intent
but also shortage of manpower and infrastructure. It has reportedly referred
eight cases of suspected malfeasance by chartered accountants to the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. But nothing happened. DCA
admitted to the JPC that though they have powers to prosecute chartered
accountants, it has hardly been used.

The New Old JPC
If experts and officials have such a ham handed approach, you can hardly
expect ignorant politicians to do any better. But that does not prevent them
from messing around. On 26 th April 2001 the BJP-led government, under
pressure from the opposition parties agreed to set up another JPC to
investigate the market crash. In fact, the setting up of India’s second ever
JPC to investigate a financial scam was the result of political haggling.
Tehelka had exposed bribery in defence deals that threatened to bring down
the government and the opposition parties were baying for blood. A

compromise had to be worked out. So, the government agreed to form a JPC
for the stock market crash and only an inquiry commission to investigate
Tehelka.
However, it made sure that the 30-member, multi-party JPC was crippled
from the start. It was headed by Prakash Mani Tripathi, a retired Lieutenant
General who knew little about the intricacies of the stock market. What
made this JPC rather unique was that it included several politicians who used
to openly fraternise with many of the brokers and companies who were to be
investigated in the scam! Quite obviously, they lost no time in making their
sympathies clear. Besides, they were reluctant to expand the investigation to
cover the two main sources of the scam: the business houses who colluded
with the scamsters and UTI. The scam investigation meandered along
sloppily as deals and bargains were allegedly struck in the background.
We thought the scam of 1992 was audacious. The scam of 2001 was more
so. We thought JPC of 1992 was docile. The JPC of 2001 beat it hollow with
its insipid probe and supreme inaction. It sought three extensions and made
sure the key scamsters were let off. Before submitting its inane report on 19
th
December 2002, it questioned regulatory agencies including RBI for being
lax in governing co-operative banks. A draft report leaked to the media had
accused the upright UTI Bank chief (P.J.Nayak) of planning personal gains
from its proposed merger with GTB. There was enormous embarrassment
when he promptly handed in his resignation and went on leave and his name,
correctly did not figure in the final report. It indicted SEBI for lack of
alertness that led to the withdrawal of Rs 1900 crore by the Reliance group
from the market in less than two weeks, leading to the market crash. JPC
also criticised SEBI for failing to avert the payment crisis on the Calcutta
Stock Exchange (CSE), despite being aware of the irregularities. In October
2002, JPC zeroed in on Ketan Parekh as the main culprit behind the stock
market scam, the CSE payment crisis and the problem of MMCB. Ketan’s
interrogation was almost benign, no doubt influenced by various interests
working within the JPC.
Intriguingly, JPC never probed GTB’s role and why the RBI failed to
detect it. In fact, some questions asked in connection with GTB were
downright laughable. For instance, it was asked whether GTB had diverted
any funds and if so to whom? Since banks rarely divert funds themselves,

the categorical answer was a bland negative. It would have been logical to
ask whether RBI’s inspections threw up irregularities involving Ketan
Parekh, First Global Finance, Zee, HFCL and others.
One of the JPC members Nilotpal Basu of the CPM, writing in the
communist party mouthpiece People’s Democracy, admits that JPC failed to
“establish the nexus between brokers, bankers and most importantly
corporate entities”. Basu alleges that JPC was “severely handicapped”
because it did not get the “required support” from regulatory and other
bodies. If this was so, JPC, led by a chairman (never heard of in any context
before or since the JPC) and a band of self-serving politicians, was really a
non-entity.
Although armed with sweeping powers to call for witnesses, the JPC was
unable to unearth anything consequential or recommend significant systemic
changes. It couldn’t even force the regulators — SEBI, RBI, DCA – to do a
much more focused investigation.
One example is JPC’s finding on the role of OCBs and sub-accounts of
FIIs. It concluded that there was no regulatory framework to keep an eye on
OCBs. They were neither registered nor regulated by SEBI. The former
SEBI chairman had categorically said that OCBs were not SEBI’s
responsibility. The RBI contented that OCBs were not under its regulation
either. The Committee’s persistent query as to which authority is responsible
for OCBs drew a blank!
In the end, JPC did not add anything to our knowledge of the scam and
exonerated several key players, by selective identification. It named Ketan
Parekh as the key player in the scam, gave Yashwant Sinha, the then finance
minister, a clean chit, falsely hung former finance secretary Ajit Kumar for
the UTI collapse and blamed SEBI and finance ministry for not being
vigilant. It also pointed to the nexus between Dinesh Dalmia of DSQ
Software, broker-directors of CSE, officials of Stock Holding Corporation
and UTI. It washed its hands off the scam by suggesting that SEBI or the
DCA should further investigate the nexus between corporate bodies and
brokers.

The DSQ Saga
Every stock market scam involves some top market operators or brokers
(such as Ketan Parekh), banks who are willing to fund it (GTB, MMCB) and
industrialists who are closely connected with both. There have been many
industrialists in this last category but none as spectacularly brazen as Dinesh
Dalmia of DSQ.
His shenanigans are simply astounding. He issued 14 million new shares
to three Mauritius-based companies without informing stock exchanges or
shareholders about the 50% increase in capital. These shares were in turn
delivered as a payment by his brokers during the CSE crisis. Fortunately for
Dalmia, this obvious case of fraud was not being pursued by regulators with
any seriousness.
He had the distinction of being under investigation by almost all
investigative agencies you can think of – Enforcement Directorate (ED),
Serious Frauds Office (SFO), SEBI and the police. With incredible deftness
in manipulating the regulators and courts, he has continued to escape the
long arm of the law. DCA allowed him to compound several offences,
refused to investigate the quality of his audited accounts and made no
attempt to remove him from management despite having the powers to do
so.
He has even pulled off a bigger scam. Even as Sucheta was breaking the
news of his many shenanigans over a series of articles – Dalmia simply
demerged the US and European subsidiaries of DSQ Software, renamed
them as Total Infosystems and sold off their main business contracts to
Scandent Network Pvt Ltd, controlled by Ramesh Vangal in mid-2002.
Dalmia pocketed Rs 145 crore, leaving a shell company listed and traded in
the market!
None of the regulatory agencies, mutual funds that held DSQ shares or
those championing corporate governance have bothered to question the sale
of these assets. Soon after, Dalmia attempted to take over a Texas-based telemarketing company called Aegis Communications Inc, through an offshore
company called AllServe Systems. This was happening even as the
regulators were investigating his involvement in share price manipulation at

the CSE and the dubious preferential allotment to three Overseas Corporate
Bodies.
Dalmia pulled off a scam similar to DSQ Software even with DSQ
Biotech. While investigating his forex violations in DSQ Software, the ED
stumbled on similar dealings and worse in DSQ Biotech Ltd, earlier known
as Square D Biotech and renamed as Origin Agrostar Limited in October
2001. The shares of loss-making DSQ Biotech shot from around Rs 50 in
January 2000 to a phenomenal Rs 907 by February 2000. In the first week of
March 2000, Dalmia made a preferential issue of 80,30,000 shares worth Rs
220 crore to four OCBs including Deutsche Bank International, (22 lakh
shares), Societe Generale (11 lakh shares), AJ Finance Ltd (30 lakh) and
Greenfield Investments Ltd (17.3 lakh). The ED smelt a rat when it
discovered that the shares were allotted at Rs 275 each, when the ruling scrip
price was over Rs 800.
Interestingly, the company “received” barely 30% of the money against
the preferential allotment and has made no effort to collect it either. The ED
also found that two of the OCBs, AJ Finance and Greenfield Investments
belonged to Dalmia himself (AJ apparently stands for his relative Ajay
Jhunjhunwala). By September 2000, DSQ Biotech’s scrip was crashing and
Dalmia needed to deliver shares to various stockbrokers. He asked the
National Share Depository to dematerialise shares allotted to Greenfield and
AJ. Within seven days after they were dematerialised, the shares were
transferred to DSQ Holdings, Dalmia’s family holding company. But five
well-known brokerage firms were delivered physical share certificates
leading a direct trail to DSQ Holdings and confirming that Dalmia was
distributing the shares allotted to two OCBs on a preferential basis.
DSQ Biotech’s books needed to reflect the receipt of money for the
preferentially allotted shares. So Dalmia resorted to an absurdly simple trick
to simply circulate his funds. He went to Kolkata and opened 13 new bank
accounts. He then moved money from DSQ Biotech to each of these
companies from its account at the same branch. Each of these companies
then entered into a series of transactions with each other to camouflage their
trail and finally routed the money back to DSQ Biotech. The question
remains, what was the deal with the other two OCBs, Deutsche Bank
International and Societe Generale? Their custodial agent, Standard

Chartered bank has made no effort to pursue the deal although they have not
received their shares or made full payment for them. The stock exchanges
where the DSQ Biotech scrip was listed were clueless about all this. The
exchanges have suspended the scrip from trading for non-compliance with
listing rules.
Dalmia obviously thought he is regulation-proof. His easy manipulation of
the equity capital of his companies demonstrates his enormous confidence
about being able to beat the regulators. Indeed, Dalmia’s tricks at DSQ
Software as also DSQ Biotech were discovered mostly by chance. In DSQ
Software, it was an ill-judged boast by Dalmia to Sucheta that he increased
his capital to acquire the San Jose based Fortuna Technologies that led to the
unravelling of his fake capital expansion and showed that it was
unconnected to any overseas deal. In DSQ Biotech, the ED stumbled on his
mischief while investigating DSQ Software. Finally, in September 2004,
SEBI finally cracked down on Dalmia in its harshest order ever. The
regulator barred Dinesh Dalmia and DSQ Software from accessing the
capital market ‘in any manner’ for 10 years and has asked him to buy 1.3
crore shares circulated in the secondary market without listing and to hold
them in a separate demat account until the capital of the company is
permitted to be reduced. He has been asked to deposit the value of Rs1.30
crore shares calculated at Rs 630 crore (at an average price of the shares in
the settlement when they were fraudulently issued), in a separate escrow
account, until various police and investigative agencies, including the CBI
complete their investigation.
SEBI, again for the first time ever, also punished the four reputed
‘independent’ directors on DSQ’s board. Mohammed Ghulam Ghouse, B.K.
Pal, K.M. Venkateshwaran and Brig (Retd) V.M. Sundaram have been
debarred from the capital market for five years for failing to exercise due
diligence and in the process abetting Dalmia’s ‘‘large scale fraudulent
activities’’. SEBI’s actions stop at the fraudulent preferential allotment of
shares while Dalmia’s fraudulent sale of DSQ’s assets, market manipulation,
violation of company law and foreign exchange violations are unpunished.
Today, Dalmia is wanted by the Kolkata police, has a red-corner Interpol
alert issued against him and is absconding from the country. It is not quite
clear if he will ever face actual punishment.

Where is the Money?
Four years later, what is significant about Scam 2001 is that there isn’t
even a pretence at recovering the money. In Scam 1992, the bank accounts
of the brokers were frozen, their shares and assets seized and auctioned off
through a Special Court. And yet, India’s legal enforcement and
accountability is so pathetic that almost nobody has been punished. Here is a
scandalous story. The Custodian, set up under the Special Courts (Trial of
Offences relating to transactions in securities) Act of 1992, has the first right
over the assets of all persons notified under the Act. One of the few scam
accused whose liabilities was not even under dispute was the T B Ruia
group. In a consent decree filed in 1995, the group admitted to receiving
over Rs 18 crore from the Bhupen Dalal Group and agreed to pay it to the
custodian but defaulted on payments. The Custodian’s office in Mumbai said
that T.B.Ruia’s admitted liabilities exceeded Rs 64 crore which went up to
Rs 100 crore after interest calculations. But there was no action.
Then in 2001 GTB had acquired Rs 74 crore worth of property (some
23,000 square meters of land) belonging to Killick Financial Services in
Mumbai in enforcing a guarantee provided by it to three companies –
Filtrona India, Millennium Caribonum and Lodestar Slotted Angles. Further,
Killick Nixon, the parent company had similar debt-asset swap deals with
ING Vysya bank, of which one that was signed in 1999 was worth Rs 105
crore. Killick Financial Services and Killick Nixon both belong to T B Ruia.
How were these properties outside the Custodian’s reach? Wasn’t it strange
then that a notified party, owing money to the Custodian, continued to have
large unattached assets, that it used to provide guarantees to GTB and ING
Vysya Bank for other stock market transactions? Did all the authorities
forget about the existence of the Custodian and the 1992 Act?
But in 1992 there was at last an official custodian. In Scam 2001 there is
not even any organised effort at recovery. This time, no accounts were
frozen. Worse, kingpin Ketan Parekh managed to buy time by offering to
repay banks without actually bothering to do so. He was granted conditional
bail in the MMCB case by committing a staggered repayment of Rs 882
crore that he siphoned out of the bank. He didn’t make even a single one of
the promised payments. In the BOI case he made an initial payment of Rs 9
crore. Later the bank signed a staggered repayment deal giving him a

generous moratorium of four years before repayment began. Meanwhile the
Rs 130 crore that he owed the bank has been fully provided by the bank in
its accounts and the Chairman who did this deal, has retired.
More intriguing was the case of Mukesh Babu, a low-key broker for
Ketan who had got Rs 225.63 crore from MMCB. Neither SEBI nor RBI
initiated action against him, though JPC says that he admitted a liability of
Rs 225.63 crore to SEBI. The NSE certified that he has no liabilities to the
exchange (since SEBI had not flagged him as being under investigation!).
Empanelled with UTI and other leading institutions Mukesh Babu continued
to do uninterrupted business for three years after the scam without any
pressure to repay MMCB.
Sucheta asked the UTI chairman, M Damodaran, how could Mukesh Babu
continue to get business from UTI. He said that his vigilance department had
found no investigation pending against him. He was also under the
impression that Mukesh Babu’s name did not figure in the JPC report.
Moreover, there seemed to be a deliberate effort to dilute his role and
references to him in the JPC report itself. For instance, page 27, para 4.35 of
the JPC report notes under an asterisk that Ketan Parekh owes Mukesh Babu
Rs 100 crore, but not that he in turn owes it to MMCB. Curiously, the RBI
report to the JPC has a lower estimate of what Mukesh Babu owes. How and
why is JPC’s and RBI’s estimate of Mukesh Babu’s debt so much lower than
his self-confessed liability to SEBI? And why has there been no effort to
recover the money when Mukesh Babu was still getting loads of institutional
business well after the scam?
Interestingly, by the time the Action Taken Report was submitted to
Parliament in 2003, references to Mukesh Babu had been dropped entirely!
Could Mukesh Babu’s hefty liability of Rs 225.63 crore vanish due to
oversight? Three years after the scam, he continued to run his business as
usual with nobody worrying him about repayment. Again, action followed
an article by Sucheta in the Indian Express . Today, he still hasn’t repaid the
money, but at least his brokerage business and his depository business have
been suspended until investigation is complete. While many other have
escaped regulatory action even now, some key players in the scam have even
been exonerated. However, between July-October 2004, SEBI issued a series
of orders indicting or suspending many brokers and big players involved in

price manipulation of scrips in the pre-scam days. Whether these orders will
stand scrutiny in Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) remains to be seen.

Media manipulation
An interesting aspect of the Scam 2001 was the close nexus of scamsters
not only with reporters but also publishers and senior executives of media
companies. This was partly due to Ketan Parekh’s focus on media and
entertainment stocks. Sections of the media were busy courting Parekh.
Many of them made public issues with his support and were naturally
favourably inclined towards him when he stood exposed. In these situations,
the links went to the very top. As we wrote earlier one editor suddenly
turned into an expert on bulls and bears and got an edit page space in a
leading daily. His view: bears destroy the economy and bullishness is good.
The same editor was trying to raise private investment for his two-bit
publishing company. The cover page of his investment information
memorandum proclaimed equity participation from the Ketan Parekh Group
as its selling point.
A media company, which publishes a popular tabloid had its issue leadmanaged by Parekh’s investment banking company at the height of his
popularity. Its shares obviously sold at a high premium. A whole raft of
business journalists were planting reports on behalf of the scamsters in
leading business dailies. Their editors chose to turn a blind eye even to
specific information against their staff. Many well known newspapers and
so-called firebrand editors operated like hired guns on behalf of the
scamster-lobby and were willing to print smear campaigns against those who
tried to expose the operators. Sucheta received emails warning her that she
would be the subject of such a smear campaign if she didn’t stop writing.
The threats turned out to be true.
After the Scam of 1992, we thought we had seen the worst of the kind of
threats and intimidation that the corporate sector could indulge in. But Ketan
Parekh, their industrialist cronies and Shankar Sharma of First Global
showed us how much worse it could get. In April 2001 we filed a complaint
with the Press Council of India against The Asian Age for a slanderous piece

of writing against us. In November 2003, the Press Council ruled in our
favour. The paper wrote to the Press Council that its nasty, motivated report
had “not intended to malign” us but it never bothered to publish the Press
Council ruling as required under the order. Unfortunately, the Press Council
itself is toothless and can do nothing about it. Meanwhile, Shankar Sharma
of First Global filed a civil and criminal defamation case against Sucheta and
the Indian Express.
SEBI’s action against First Global and Shankar Sharma’s arrest attracted
many sympathisers including India’s best-known editors and columnists who
blindly assumed that First Global was being persecuted for having funded
Tehelka. Most of them were not business writers. Worse, they were neither
familiar nor interested about the facts – facts concerning First Global before
Tehelka happened. This is documented in a SAT order. Facts such as a 199900 RBI annual inspection report of GTB had documented highly irregular
lending to First Global. The RBI report listed 46 instances of how Rs 354
crore was released to several investment companies based on oral sanctions,
with names like Panchal Components and Appliances, Vitra Trade &
Agencies, Top Gear Leasing & Finance, Vruddhi Confinvest India, UD&MD
Agencies, Naulakha Financial Services and Mohan Fiscal Services. The
money was used to buy the shares of HFCL, whose promoters were thick
with Ketan Parekh and whose stock Parekh was ramping up.
First Global also got a hefty overdraft of Rs 44.5 crore from GTB to buy
HFCL equity. Instead of placing the shares directly with foreign institutions,
First Global’s investment outfits first bought the stock at Rs 1050 a share
and resold it to the foreign institutions at a premium of Rs 10 to Rs 25. The
ED sent a notice to First Global about this, a week before the Tehelka
expose, a fact that the Delhi High Court has underlined while rejecting
charges of harassment that the editors were exercised about.
Indeed, while bleeding heart columnists were bemoaning that First Global
had to close down due to government vendetta, it has been doing business in
the US and UK. On 8 th September 2003, it released a research report on the
same scam-tainted HFCL that had crashed by then from Rs 2500 to Rs 8. It
recommended the stock as a strong buy, calling it the biggest turnaround

story in India and comparing it with a similar opportunity to buy Dell
Computer!
A s all these examples show, the saga of the twin scams will linger forever.
The participants would die, continue to run their business until caught out,
then dropping off from the limelight, some will try to make daring
comebacks, but most would be running surreptitious operations, flying under
the radar of regulators. Nothing would be resolved. Hardly anybody would
be convicted. No money would be found.

Moneylife, an Essential Tool for
Learning- Earning-Spending-Investing Cycle

Moneylife is a fortnightly magazine with unique features and
powerful pedigree. It empowers the individual to invest and spend
wisely by offering hard facts, insightful opinions, unbiased options
and useful tips from the world of money. Moneylife is essential not
only for those early in the earning-spending-investing cycle but also
those wanting to optimise their value of investments and plan for a
financially trouble-free education, marriage and retirement.

Team : Moneylife has been launched by some of India's best
financial journalists. Debashis Basu , a Chartered Accountant by
qualification with 25 years of experience as a journalist and the
author of several business books. He has worked with The Times of
India, Business World, Business India, Business Today, Financial
Express and has written columns for Business Standard and The
Economic Times. Sucheta Dalal is among the best known financial
journalists in India (awarded Padma Shri in 2006), is the consulting
editor. Moneylife also features top-notch experts as columnists.

Content : Moneylife is sharply focused on stocks, mutual funds,
careers, consumer rights plus education, smart borrowing and
spending. The content is unbiased and relevant. The treatment is
gripping and lean.

Differentiation : Moneylife delivers a stellar mix of credible and
unique content, sharp analysis and a lucid writing style in a classy
design and layout that is a cut above its competitors.

Many Firsts : Moneylife is the first publication in India to
introduce fund screens and stock screens. It identifies stocks
through a well-tested and transparent method and not through
hunch, impression and gut feeling. Moneylife has set the highest
standards of analysis in discussing fund performance, cutting
through hype and gimmick of funds. Our incisive analysis is taken
very seriously by the fund industry and the regulators.

Results : Our stock recommendations have been consistently
rewarding, fetching returns far in excess of the best mutual funds.
We bring unique accountability to our recommendation, offering a
comprehensive review once every year. This is a first in India.

Pathbreakers : Finally, our unique long career interviews have
drawn out the fascinating stories of the biggest and the best
achievers in their own words. Moneylife has been the only
magazine to feature luminaries such as Mukesh Ambani, Rajiv
Bajaj, Keki Dadiseth, KV Kamath, RA Mashelkar, Aditya Puri,
Ratan Tata, Amitabh Bachchan, Lord Meghnad Desai, Hemendra
Kothari, Dr Ramakant Panda, RK Laxman etc. These gripping
interviews have become the talking points across the country and
have been compiled as bestselling titles called “Pathbreakers” 1 &
2.

Debashis Basu became a Chartered Accountant in 1983 and has worked as a
journalist between 1984-1994 for Business India, Business World, Financial
Express, The Times of India and Business Today. Between 1994 and 2000 he
has written weekly columns for Business Standard and The Economic
Times. He now runs, KenSource, a research and publishing firm and is the
editor and publisher of Moneylife, a personal finance magazine. His
previous books are Face Value: Creation and Destruction of Shareholder
Value in India; Growth Alchemy: Why smaller Firms Fail to Find Finance
and how market-based Solutions can Help; Pathbreakers 1&2 and Plain
Truth Series on Investment. He was also a member of the Task Force of
Securities and Exchange Board of India on the creation of IndoNext market
segment for smaller companies and served as the member of the mutual fund
advisory committee of SEBI.

S
ucheta
Dalal majored in statistics and then completed LLM. Her 25 years of
outstanding investigative reporting spanning the Harshad Mehta scam, CR
Bhansali scam, Enron, bad loans in banks, numerous corporate shenanigans
and regulatory lapses have appeared in Business Standard, The Economic
Times and The Times of India. She received the Chameli Devi Award for
outstanding journalism and Femina Woman of Substance Award, both in
1993. She served as a member of the NR Narayana Murthy committee on
corporate governance in 2003, was a member of the primary market advisory
committee of SEBI and a member of Investor Education and Protection
Fund of the Government of India. She is also a trustee of the Ahmedabad –
based Consumer Research and Education Centre. Her previous books are
AD Shroff: A Titan of Finance and Pathbreakers.

Jacket Design : Surendra Chaurasiya

KenSource
315, 3 rd Floor,
Hind Service Industries Premises,
Off Veer Savakar Marg, Shivaji Park,
Dadar(W), Mumbai- 400028.

1 BRs were issued by banks who sold securities but were unable to deliver them
immediately. They specified what had been sold and that money was received from the buying bank
while the securities were to be delivered later. Once the delivery was made, the BR stood discharged.
2 The reconciliation could be done only by getting hold of a statement of outstanding SGLs
which would show the securities that SBI was supposed to get. When banks buy and sell a government
security, they rarely exchange paper. They exchange SGL notes which are presented to the PDO. The
selling bank issues the SGL notes to the buying bank which then deposits them in the PDO. The PDO
would then debit the selling bank’s account and credit the buying bank. Under the system, if bank X
has to sell 11.5% 2010, it would have to have a positive balance of that as per the PDO’s books. If not,
on presentation to the PDO, it’s SGLs will “bounce”. If it is holding SGLs, as Khemani thought the
SBI did, it’s PDO balance should reflect this. 3 As described earlier, SGLs were issued as a substitute
for actual securities. Very often BRs replaced SGLs. A BR would confirm that the selling bank had
sold the securities at the rates mentioned therein. The BR was designed to avoid the SGL bouncing.
Through a BR, a bank could put through deals even if their PDO balance was not positive. This wasn’t
possible if the transaction took place through SGLs – they would simply bounce.
4 Units
refer to the Unit-64 Scheme of UTI.
5 These were a Rs.89.05 crore deal for units of 31 st
January, a Rs.44.97 crore transaction for treasury bills for 14 th March, a Rs.90.45 crore transaction
for 17% NTPC bonds of 30 th March and a 37.71 crore transactions for units dated 16 th March.
6 These included a Rs.47.95 crore deal for treasury bills, a Rs.151.99 crore transaction for
2007 central loan and a Rs.101.88 crore 2010 securities transaction.
7 Section 6(1) of The
NHB Act prescribes that a bank will have three experts from housing, architecture, engineering,
sociology, finance, law, management and corporate planning, etc. Three persons who have worked in
housing finance institutions, two from RBI, three officials from the central government and two from
the state government.
8 This included: Rs.290 crore of units, Rs.263 crore of Cantriple,
Rs.385 crore of IRFC bonds, Rs.80 crore of 12.5% central loan of 2007, Rs.50 crore of 6% central
loan of 1994, Rs. 20 crore of 11% IDBI bonds of 2002, Rs. 47 crore of 11% IDBI bonds of 2002, Rs.
23 crore of 8.75% of IDBI bonds of 2000, Rs. 50 crore of 12% ICICI bonds of 2011 and Rs. 45 crore
of missing BRs. The last item was shocking. Stanchart hadn't kept even the (false) BRs properly.
9 The control over Nedungadi subsequently passed on to some brokers closed to Ratnakar
such as Rajendra Banthia, former vice-president of BSE. The bank became controversial in 2001 and
was under the scrutiny of RBI for its market exposure and Banthia's large stake.
10 This was
a Fairgrowth innovation, similar to Bankers Reciepts issued by banks.
11 “Citibank entered
into a large number of ready forward transactions... where the second leg of the transaction has not
been completed. For eg, in respect of transactions with Canfina, on behalf of fiduciary clients in...
bonds of an aggregate value of Rs.235 crore when the second leg of transactions fell due between June
and August 1992, the same have not been accepted by Canfina.”
12 Stefan Wagstyl of The
Financial Times had hardly spent a few months in India when the scam story broke and knew precious
detail about the way foreign firms operating here. Yet, he showed admirable confidence in himself and
unsettling disdain for Indian opinion. This opinion of foreign firms being toward little things lost in
the woods and mauled by the natives is widespread among the small community of foreign
correspondents. This was repeated during the recent Enron scandal.
13 The Rs.550 crore of
11.5% 2010 that SBI bought came from Canfina (Rs.125 crore) , Stanchart (Rs.150 crore), BankAm
(Rs.75 crore). Canara Bank (Rs.150 crore), Grindlays and Karur Vysya (Rs.25 crore each). Aggarwala
supplied Rs.250 crore and Kothari Rs.300 crore. Half of the profit made by Kothari may have gone to
Kayan of C Mackertich, Calcutta.
14 He apparently picked up Aftek Infosystems at around
Rs.40 ; the stock hit Rs.5000 at its peak.
15 The K-10 were: Silverline, Global Telesystems,
Satyam Computers, Zee, HFCL, SSI, Aftek Infosystems, DSQ Software, Ranbaxy, Pentamedia
16 As part of his promised clean-up early 2000, Dalmia placed shares with institutional
investors led by Bank of America. Pawan Kumar from IBM joined as president, lending credibility to

DSQ's clean-up operation. DSQ got the money but Rs.220 crore was again taken out too fund brokers
in what is suspected to be Dalmia's own possessions and later returned.


